{"id": "42874", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42874", "title": "History of the world", "text": "The history of the world (also called human history) is the study of what the entire human race did in the past. It includes the time from prehistory to the present day. It is different from natural history.\nDevelopment of the human species.\nModern human beings are called \"Homo sapiens\" ('wise man'). They have existed for about 250,000 years. Biologists believe that \"Homo sapiens\" evolved in Africa.\n\"Homo sapiens\", lived at the same time as other \"species\" of human. These included \"Homo erectus\" ('standing man') and \"Homo neanderthalensis\" ('man from Neanderthal'). The theory of human evolution says that modern humans, Neanderthals, and \"Homo erectus\" slowly developed from other earlier species of human-like creatures.\n\"Homo neanderthalensis\" are the first humans scientists discovered which were not \"Homo sapiens\". \"Homo neanderthalensis\" are usually called Neanderthal Man. They were discovered when the cranium of a skull was found in the Neanderthal Valley in 1856. It was different from a modern human skull so scientists believed it was from a new species. Entire Neanderthal skeletons have been found in other places since then. When ancient stone tools are found, their style often shows whether they were made by \"Homo sapiens\" or Neanderthals (see Palaeolithic). Neanderthals existed before modern humans. They knew how to use tools and fire.\nScientists believe that \"Homo sapiens\" spread from Africa to all other parts of the world, replacing \"Homo neanderthalensis\" in Europe and \"Homo erectus\" in Asia. By the end of the Stone Age, it is believed that \"Homo sapiens\" were the only type of humans left.\nInfluence of climate.\nClimate is the normal weather in a place. It changes from one part of the world to another. Some areas are hot all year, and some are cold all year. Some areas are dry all year, and others are wet all year. Most areas have climates that are warmer in the summer and cooler in the winter. Most parts of the world get rain at some times of the year and do not get rain at other times of the year. Some parts of the world have oceanic climates and others have alpine climates.\nClimate affects what food people eat. This is because climate affects what foods can grow. If one food is easier to grow, people usually eat that food more often than other foods. Foods that people eat more of than other foods are called staple foods. Staple foods are usually grains or vegetables because they are easy to grow. Wheat, maize, millet, rice, oats, rye, potatoes, yams, breadfruit and beans are examples of different staple foods from around the world.\nClimate can affect the way people live in many other ways. It affects the types of animals that can live in any area, which affect the types of meats that are available to eat.\nClimate also affects the buildings that people make, the clothes that they wear and the way that they travel.\nClimate change.\nThe climate on earth has not stayed the same through human history. There are long periods of time when it is generally warmer, and there are long periods of time when it is generally colder. When it is generally colder, there is more ice on the poles of the planet. A cold period is called an ice age. There have been many ice ages in the history of the earth. Two have affected humans.\nFrom 70,000 to around 10,000 years ago there was a big ice age which affected humans and the way that they lived. Between 1600\u00a0AD and 1900\u00a0AD there was a period called the Little Ice Age when the climate was a little bit colder than usual.\nPrehistory.\nThe word \"Prehistory\" means \"before history\". It is used for the long period of time before humans began to write about their lives. This time is divided into two main ages: the Paleolithic Age (or Early Stone Age) and the Neolithic Age (or late Stone Age). The two ages did not start and end at the same time everywhere. A place moved from one age to another depending on when people changed their technology.\nThe end of prehistory varies from one place to another. It depends on the date when that place began to use writing. In Egypt the first written documents date from around 3200\u00a0BC. In Australia the first written records date from 1788 and in New Guinea from about 1900.\nPaleolithic Era.\nThe Paleolithic Era is by far the longest age of humanity's time, about 99% of human history. The Paleolithic Age started about 2.6 million years ago and ended around 10,000\u00a0BC. The age began when hominids (early humans) started to use stones as tools for bashing, cutting and scraping. The age ended when humans began to plant crops and have other types of agriculture. In some areas, such as Western Europe, the way that people lived was affected by the Ice age. In these places, people moved towards agriculture quicker than in warmer places where there was always lots of food to gather. Their culture is sometimes called the Mesolithic Era (Middle Stone Age).\nDuring the Paleolithic Era humans grouped together in small bands. They lived by gathering plants and hunting wild animals. This way of living is called a \"hunter-gatherer society\". People hunted small burrowing animals like rabbits, as well as birds and herds of animals like deer and cattle. They also gathered plants to eat, including grains. Grain often grows on grasslands where herds of grass-eating animals are found. People also gathered root vegetables, green vegetables, beans, fruit, seeds, berries, nuts, eggs, insects and small reptiles.\nMany Paleolithic bands were nomadic. They moved from place to place as the weather changed. They followed herds of animals that they hunted from their winter feeding places to their summer feeding places. If there was a drought,flood, or some other disaster, the herds and the people might haved moved a long distance, looking for food. During the \"Ice Age\" a lot of the water on Earth turned to ice. This made sea much lower than it is now. People were able to walk through Beringia from Siberia to Alaska. Bands of \"Homo sapiens\" ( another word for people) travelled to that area from Asia. At that time there were rich grasslands with many large animals that are now extinct. It is believed that many groups of people travelled there over a long time and later spread to other parts of America, as the weather changed.\nPaleolithic people used stone tools. Sometimes a stone tool was just a rock. It might have been useful for smashing a shell or an animal's skull, or for grinding grain on another rock. Other tools were made by breaking rocks to make a sharp edge. The next development in stone tool making was to chip all the edges of a rock so that it made a pointed shape, useful for a spearhead, or arrow tip. Some stone tools are carefully \"flaked\" at the edges to make them sharp, and symmetrically shaped. Paleolithic people also used tools of wood and bone. They probably also used leather and vegetable fibers but these have not lasted from that time. Paleolithic people also knew how to make fire which they used for warmth and cooking.\nSettling down.\nIn the \"Paleolithic Era\" there were many different human species. According to current research, only the modern human reached the \"Neolithic Era\".\nThe Neolithic era was marked by changes in society. During the Neolithic era, people started to settle down. They developed agriculture and domesticated animals, both of which took a very long time. Because of these two things, people did not have to migrate as much any more. Villages could grow to much larger sizes than before. Over time, villages fought and spread their control over larger areas and some became civilisations. During this time, humankind also developed further intellectually, militarily and spiritually.\nWhen humans started to grow crops and domesticate certain animals such as dogs, goats, sheep, and cattle; their societies changed. Because people now grew crops and raised livestock, they started to stay in the same place and build permanent settlements. In most places, this happened between 10,000 and 12,000 years ago. Their diet also changed. People ate more cereals and vegetables. They started to keep extra foods and seeds for later. In some years there were surpluses (extras) that could be traded for other goods.\nThese changes happened independently in many parts of the world. They did not happen in the same order though. For example, the earliest farming societies in the Near East did not use pottery. No one is sure if Britain had agriculture, or if permanent villages existed there at all. Early Japanese societies used pottery \"before\" developing agriculture.\nVere Gordon Childe gave the name \"Neolithic Revolution\" to this process in the 1920s. He thought that it was as important as the Industrial Revolution (which happened in the 18th and 19th century).\nAncient history \u2013 the early civilizations.\nAncient history was the time from the development of writing to the fall of the Roman Empire. The fall of the Roman Empire caused chaos in Europe, leading to the Middle Ages (also called the Dark Ages or the Age of Faith).\nThe first civilizations were built along major river systems. These civilizations are called river valley civilizations. River valley civilizations were the most powerful civilizations in this time period because water was needed to have an agricultural society.\nThese civilizations were similar in that:\nMiddle East and North Africa.\nSumer.\nSumer was the world's first known ancient civilization. The Sumerians took over the fertile crescent region of Mesopotamia around 3300 BCE. They grew crops on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. By 3000 BCE, many cities had been built in parts of Sumerian Mesopotamia. They formed independently and each had their own government. They were called city-states and often fought with each other.\nA surplus in food led to a Division of labour. This means that some people were able to stop growing crops and do other jobs, since enough crops were already grown. This brought a split in society. Today, such a split is called \"social pyramid\". In a social pyramid, people are grouped into social classes based on their wealth and power. In Sumer, the king, priests, and government officials were at the top of the social pyramid. Below them were the artisans, merchants, farmers, and fishers. At the bottom of the pyramid were slaves. Slaves were often prisoners of war, criminals, or people working to pay off debt.\nThe Sumerians created the world's first system of writing; it was called cuneiform. The oldest versions of one of the world's first literary works, the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", go back to this time. In Sumer, only the sons of the rich and powerful learned how to read and write. They went to a school called \"edubba\". Only the boys who went to \"edubba\" could become scribes.\nThe Sumerians also invented sun-dried bricks, the wheel, the ox plow, and were skilled at making pottery. They are also thought to have invented the sailboat.\nAfter the Sumerians, the civilizations of Babylonia and then Assyria rose to power in Mesopotamia.\nBabylonia had a king named Hammurabi. He is famous for the Codex Hammurabi.\nJust to the east was the long-lasting civilization of Elam.\nAncient Egypt.\nAncient Egypt grew along the Nile river. It was created around 3500\u00a0BC. It was most powerful in the second millennium BC. When it was its biggest, it went all the way from the Nile delta to a mountain called Jebel Barkal in Sudan. It probably ended at about 30\u00a0BC when the country was invaded by the Roman Empire.\nThe society of ancient Egypt depended on a balance of natural and human resources, especially the irrigation of the Nile Valley so that Egyptians could grow crops.\nThere was a great difference between classes in this society. Most of the people were farmers but they did not own the agricultural products they produced. These were property of the state, temple, or noble family that owned the land. There was slavery, but it is not clear how it was practiced.\nThe Religion of Ancient Egypt encouraged people to respect their rulers and their past.\nThe Egyptians are known for writing in hieroglyphs, building the famous pyramids, and building other sorts of tombs and big temples and for their military.\nThe religion of Judaism formed about 1500 BCE around the Egyptian and Babylonian civilizations.\nMid and Eastern Asia.\nAncient China.\nChina began as city-states in the Yellow River valley. The Shang Dynasty (\u5546\u671d) was the first dynasty of Ancient China.Turtle shells with writing on them have been carbon dated to about 1500\u00a0BC.\nThe Zhou Dynasty came after the Shang Dynasty. \"Kong Fuzi\" and Laozi lived at the end of the Zhou Dynasty. They were the greatest Chinese philosophers. They founded new philosophies, or ways of thinking. Confucius founded Confucianism and Laozi founded Daoism.\nAfter the Zhou Dynasty came the Warring States Period.\nThe Qin (\u79e6) dynasty came after the Warring States Period. The Qin emperor Qin Shi Huang created the first centralized state in China in 221\u00a0BC. It was based on his based on his political philosophy of legalism. He made everyone write the same way. He fought against \"Confucianism\". He also started building what would later become the Great Wall.\nIn 202\u00a0BC the Han Dynasty took over. It was about as strong as the Roman Empire. Towards the end of the Han Dynasty, Buddhism became influential in China.\nAncient India/Pakistan.\nThe Indus Valley Civilization lasted from about 2600\u00a0BC to 1900\u00a0BC. It was the first urban civilization on the subcontinent. It was centered on the Indus River and its tributaries. The civilization is famous for its brick cities that had road-side drainage systems and multi-storied houses.\nThe Maurya dynasty started in 321 BCE. This was the first time most of the Indian subcontinent was united under a single government. Ashoka the Great was a famous Mauryan emperor. When he started ruling, he sought to expand his empire, but then followed a policy of ahimsa (non-violence) after converting to Buddhism. He wrote about this in the Edicts of Ashoka. The Edicts of Ashoka are the oldest historical documents from India that still exist. While Ashoka ruled, Buddhist ideals spread across all of East Asia and South-East Asia.\nThe Gupta dynasty ruled from around 320 to 550\u00a0AD. The Gupta Empire included only Central India, and the area east of current day Bangladesh. This empire never included present-day Pakistan to the west. Gupta society was ordered in {accordance with Hindu beliefs. Historians place the Gupta dynasty alongside with the Han Dynasty, Tang Dynasty and Roman Empire as a model of a classical civilization.\nThe Americas.\nAncient Maya.\nThe Maya civilization is a civilization that started in Central America. They lived mostly on the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula in what is now known as Mexico, but also Honduras, Belize and Guatemala. They were the only known civilization of pre-Columbian America to have a fully developed written language. They also made great achievements in art and architecture and had a very advanced system of mathematics and astronomy.\nThe area where the Maya civilization developed was inhabited from around the 10th millennium BC. The first Maya settlements were built there in about 1800\u00a0BC, in the Soconusco region. This is in the modern-day state of Chiapas in Mexico, on the Pacific Ocean. Today, this is called the \"Early Preclassic period\". At the time, humans began to settle down permanently. They started to grow livestock. Pottery and small clay figures were made. They constructed simple burial mounds. Later they developed these mounds into step pyramids. There were other civilizations around, especially in the north, such as the Olmec, the Mixe-Zoque, and Zapotec civilizations. These people mostly lived in the area of the modern-day state Oaxaca. The exact borders of the Maya empire in the north are unclear. There were probably areas where Maya culture overlapped with other cultures. Many of the earliest significant inscriptions and buildings appeared in this overlapping zone. These cultures and the Maya probably influenced one another.\nAustralia.\nThere has been a long history of contact between Papuan peoples of the Papua New Guinea and the Aboriginal people. Aboriginal people seem to have lived a long time in the same environment as the now extinct Australian megafauna. Stories about that are told in the oral culture of many Aboriginal groups.\nAncient Europe.\nHallstatt culture.\nThe Hallstatt era is named after the city Hallstatt in Austria, where the first artifacts were found. It lasted from about 1200\u00a0BC to about 275\u00a0BC. There were different periods, which today are mainly told apart by the kinds of brooches used at the time. These brooches changed rather rapidly, and can therefore give us good guesses at to what time they came from. Hallstatt culture sites have been found in the east of France, in Switzerland, in the south of Germany, in Austria, in Slovenia and Croatia, northwestern Hungary, southwestern Slovakia and southern Moravia. The culture can be divided into an eastern and a western one quite easily; the dividing line runs through the Czech Republic, and Austria, between longitudes 14 and 15 degrees east.\nIn this time, the social structure developed into a hierarchy. This can be documented by various things that were added to graves. In the Bronze Age, people used to live in big settlements. As iron became available, trade routes changed. A new richer class evolved. Unlike before, these richer class people liked to live in big houses in the countryside, as a demonstration of their wealth. Funerals also changed, from cremation burials, to burials with stone coffins. The new upper class used their wealth for import goods, mostly from the Mediterranean.\nLa T\u00e8ne culture.\nThe La T\u00e8ne culture is a culture that lasted from about 500\u00a0BC to about 100\u00a0AD. It is named after the city of \"La T\u00e8ne\" (today, Marin-Epagnier, next to Neuch\u00e2tel). It was influenced a lot by the Roman and Greek cultures. There are two sources for this:\nThe Celts basically lived in clans. Each clan was headed by a leader, which came from the Druids or the Bards. Women were much better off than with the Romans, they were almost equal to men. There was polygamy and polyandry (A man could have several women, a woman could have several men).\nIllyria.\nIllyria is the part of west-south Balkan Peninsula populated by Illyrians whose descendants are Albanians.\nIllyrians lived in tribunes such as Epirus, Dardania, Taulantia etc.\nThey had their own language, the Illyrian language that was different from the Greek language and Latin.\nAt the year 1000\u00a0BC the population of Illyria is estimated to be around 500,000.\nAncient Greece.\nWhat is known today as \"Ancient Greece\" is a very important period in history. Most people agree that it came after the Minoan and Mycenaean civilizations. It ended when the Romans invaded Greece, in 146\u00a0BC. Greek culture had a very powerful influence on later civilizations, especially the Romans. The Greeks developed what is now called a city-state, or a polis. There were many polises. Some of the more important ones were Athens, Sparta, Corinth and Thebes. The word \"politics\" comes from there. It literally means: things that are about the polis. Greek cities did not have much contact with each other, because of the mountains and many islands Greece is made up of. When a city no longer had enough food to care for all its citizens, some people were sent out to set up a new city. This was called a \"colony\". Each city was independent, and ruled by someone within that city. Colonies also looked to the city where they originally came from for guidance.\nWhen Greece went to war (for example against the Persian Empire), there was an alliance of such city states, against the Persians. There were also many wars between different city states.\nThere were many artists and philosophers who lived in that period. Most of them are still important for philosophy today. A well-known artist was Homer. He wrote epics about the war against the Trojans, and the early history of Greece. Other well-known artists were Aristophanes and Sappho. Well-known philosophers include Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. A well known mathematician of the time was Euclid. Statesmen of the time were Pericles and Alexander the Great.\nAncient Rome.\nAncient Rome was a civilization that started in modern-day Italy, in the 8th Century before Christ. The civilization lasted for 12 centuries. It ended, when Mehmed II conquered Constantinople, on May 29, 1453. According to legend, the Roman civilization was founded by Romulus and Remus, in the year 753\u00a0BC. The Roman Empire developed in wars against Carthage and the Seleucid Empire. Julius Caesar conquered Gaul, modern France, and Augustus ended the Roman republic by becoming emperor. At its biggest extent, the empire covered all of the Mediterranean. Rome became so big, because it led war against other nations and then assimilated their culture.\nSplit of the Empire into East and West.\nIn 293, Diocletian organized a separate administration of the western and the eastern part of the empire. The capital of the western part was Rome, the capital of the eastern part was Constantinople. Constantine I was the first to stop discrimination against Christians (313). Christianity became state religion under the reign of Theodosius I.\nThe western part of the empire had many problems with barbarians. In the 5th century, the Huns migrated westwards. This meant that the Visigoths moved into the empire, to seek protection. Rome was sacked by barbarians multiple times. On September 4, 476, the Germanic chief Odoacer forced the last Roman emperor in the west, Romulus Augustus, to quit. After about 1200 years, the rule of Rome in the West came to an end.\nThe eastern part had similar problems. Justinian I managed to conquer parts of North Africa and Italy. Shortly after he died, all that was left were parts of Southern Italy, and Sicily. In the east, the empire was threatened by the Sassanid Empire.\nNew departures and continuity.\nAfter the fall of Western Rome, the Germanic tribes that took over tried to learn from Roman civilization, but much was forgotten and up to the Renaissance not many achievements happened in Europe. But with the rise of Islam, many changes happened during the Islamic Golden Age. The Greek and Roman traditions were kept and further development took place. The Chinese civilization had a Golden Age during the Tang period, when their capital was the biggest in the world. During the Renaissance, Europe developed and made great advancements in many areas as well.\nAsia.\nMiddle East \u2013 Islamic rise, Byzantine decline.\nIn Arabia, Muhammad founded Islam in 632. His followers rapidly conquered territories in Syria and Egypt. They soon were a danger to the Byzantine Empire. In the 8th and 9th centuries, the Byzantine Empire stopped Islamic expansion and reconquered some lost territories. In 1000 A.D. the eastern Empire was at its height: Basileios II reconquered Bulgaria and Armenia. Culture and trade flourished. In 1071 the Battle of Manzikert led the empire into a dramatic decline. For the Byzantine Empire this meant centuries of civil wars and Turkic invasions. The Muslim caliphate had an Golden Age under the Abbasids.\nTheir power forced Emperor Alexius I Comnenus of the Byzantine Empire to send a call for help to the West in 1095. The West sent the Crusades. These eventually led to the \"Sack of Constantinople\" in the Fourth Crusade in 1204. Because of this, what was left of the Empire broke into successor states. The winner of these disputes was that of Nicaea. After Constantinople was again conquered by imperial forces, the empire was little more than a Greek state on the Aegean coast. The Eastern Empire came to an end when Mehmed II conquered Constantinople on May 29, 1453. The Ottoman Empire took its place and from 1400 to 1600 was the most powerful empire in the Middle East and ruled at the southern and eastern coast of the Mediterranean Sea.\nChina.\nThe Tang Dynasty (618\u2013907), with its capital at Chang'an (today Xi'an), was the biggest city in the world at the time and is considered by historians as a high point in Chinese civilization as well as a golden age of cosmopolitan culture. The Ming Dynasty ruled from 1368 to 1644. The Ming built a vast army and navy.\nIndia.\nFrom around the 6th\u20137th century. In South India, Chola kings ruled Tamil Nadu, and Chera kings ruled Kerala. They had trading relationships with the Roman Empire to the west and Southeast Asia to the east. In north India, Rajputs ruled in many kingdoms.\nIn 1336, two brothers named Harihara I and Bukka founded the Vijayanagara Empire in an area which is now in the Karnataka state of India. The most famous king of this empire was Krishnadevaraya. In 1565, rulers of this empire were defeated in a battle. But the empire continued for about the next one hundred years.\nNorthern India was ruled by Islamic sultans.\nJapan.\nThe Heian Period in Japan is famous for its art, poetry and literature. The writing system, Kana, was developed. It was followed by the feudal period (1185\u20131853) during which samurai and daimyos were the leading figures and the shogun the real monarch whereas the tenn\u014d had only a role as religious head. Between the years 1272 and 1281 the Mongols tried to invade but were driven out by the Japanese.\nIn 1542, a Portuguese ship reached Japan. Japanese learned about guns and firearms from them.\nMongols.\nGenghis Khan in 1209 brought together the Mongol tribes and founded the Mongol Empire, one of the largest land empires in history. Later Kublai Khan would go on to expand the empire and found the Mongol-ruled Yuan Dynasty of China. The empire later broke into several empires, all of which were later destroyed.\nEuropean Middle Ages.\nThe Middle Ages was the time from the fall of the Roman empire until the middle of the 15th century. From 500 to about 800 there was some decline compared with the Roman civilization. European villages were often destroyed and looted by barbarians such as the Vikings. During the High Middle Ages magnificent castles and large churches called cathedrals were built and important works of literature were written. In the later Middle Ages, there was a plague called the Black Death. The Black Death killed one-third to one-half of Europe's population.\nA system called feudalism was a very important part of the Middle Ages. In this system, the king was at the top of the social pyramid. The king gave land to the lord in exchange for loyalty. The lords were the next in the pyramid. The lords gave land (called a fief) to knights in exchange for loyalty and protection. The knights came next in the pyramid. Peasants were not part of the feudal system because they did not give or receive land. They worked on a lord's manor in exchange for protection.\nThe Crusades were also fought during the Middle Ages. There is a theory that says the Crusades helped end the Middle Ages along with the Black Death, increased trade and better farming technology.\nRenaissance.\nThe Renaissance started in Italy. \"Renaissance\" is a French word meaning \"rebirth\". The Renaissance meant that people learned from the ancient Greek and Roman or \"classical\" cultures that had been forgotten for some time. Artists learned from classical paintings and sculptures. So they reinvented perspective and the art of free standing realistic sculptures that had been characteristic in Greek and Roman art. Some famous Renaissance artists are Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Raphael. The Gutenberg printing press, invented by Johannes Gutenberg, was also developed during this time.\nThe Renaissance was also a time of great achievements in science (Galileo Galilei, Francis Bacon), philosophy (Thomas More) and literature (Dante Alighieri, William Shakespeare).\nAmerica.\nMaya civilization (classical period).\nWhat is known as the classical period lasted from about 250 to about 900. During this time, many monuments were constructed. There are also many big inscriptions from then. In this period, the Maya moved to building large cities. This is known as urbanism. Many important intellectual and artistic developments happened in an area that is known as the \"southern lowlands\".\nLike the Ancient Greek, the Maya civilization was made of many independent city-states. Agriculture was important around these city states like Tikal and Cop\u00e1n.\nThe most important monuments are the pyramids they built in their religious centers and the palaces of their rulers. The palace at Cancu\u00e9n is the largest in the Maya area. There are no pyramids in the area of the palace. Other important things the archaeologists found include the carved stone slabs usually called \"stelae\" (the Maya called them \"tetun\", or \"tree-stones\"). These slabs show rulers along with hieroglyphic texts describing their genealogy, military victories, and other accomplishments. In North America, they made Mississipian culture with the largest land field from around 800 CE to 1600.\nTrade with other civilizations.\nThe Maya also had trade routes that ran over long distances. They traded with many of the other Mesoamerican cultures, such as Teotihuacan, the Zapotec, and other groups in central and gulf-coast Mexico. They also traded with non-Mesoamerican groups, that were farther away. Archaeologists have found gold from Panama in the Sacred Cenote of Chichen Itza.\nImportant trade goods were cacao, salt, sea shells, jade and obsidian.\nSudden collapse.\nIn the 8th and 9th century, the cities in the southern lowlands had problems, and declined. At the same time, the Maya stopped making big monuments and inscriptions. Shortly afterwards, these cities were abandoned. Currently, archaeologists are not sure why this happened. There are different theories. Either ecological factors played a role in this, or the cause of this abandonment was not related to the environment.\nPost-classical period and decline.\nIn the north, development went on, form the 10th to about the 16th century. The influences from the outside left more traces in the Maya culture at that time. Some of the important sites in this era were Chichen Itza, Uxmal, and Coba. At some point, the ruling dynasties of Chichen and Uxmal declined. Afterwards, Mayapan ruled all of Yucat\u00e1n until a revolt in 1450. The area then degenerated into competing city-states until the Yucat\u00e1n was conquered by the Spanish.\nBy 1250, there developed other city-states. The Itza maintained their capital at Tayasal. It ruled over an area extending across the Peten Lakes region, including the community of Ekckixil on Lake Quexil. Postclassic Maya states also survived in the southern highlands. One of the Maya kingdoms in this area is responsible for the best-known Maya work of historiography and mythology, the Popol Vuh.\nThe Spanish started to conquer Maya lands. This took them much longer than with the Inca or Aztecs, because there was no capital city. This meant that when they had conquered one city, this had little influence on the whole empire. The last Maya states were finally subdued in 1697.\nThe Maya people did not disappear though. There are still about 6 million of them. Some are well-integrated, others continue speak one of the Maya languages and uphold their cultural heritage.\nThe Aztecs.\nThe Aztecs built an empire in Central America, mainly in Mexico. The empire lasted from the 14th to the 16th century. They spoke the Nahuatl language. Their capital was Tenochtitlan. It was built on islands in a lake. Tenochtitlan was one of the greatest cities of the world in that time.\nThe Aztecs believed in polytheism. Quetzalcoatl (feathered snake), Huitzilopochtli (hummingbird of the south) and Tezcatlipoca (smoking mirror) were the most important Gods. Sometimes the Aztecs killed humans to please their gods. Between 1519 and 1521 the Spanish leader Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s defeated the Aztecs and took their empire. Some Aztecs did not want to fight against the soldiers of Cort\u00e9s, because they thought they were Gods.\nToday many Mexicans have Aztec and other Native American forefathers. People still use Aztec symbols in Mexico. On the Mexican flag there is a picture of an eagle on a cactus with a snake in its mouth. This was an Aztec symbol. Also the name \"Mexico\" is an Aztec word.\nThe Aztecs ate a lot of plants and vegetables that could be grown easily in the Mexico area. The main food that they ate was corn, which they called maize. Another food that they ate was squash.\nAztecs also had a lot of harsh punishments for certain crimes. For the following crimes the punishment was death: adultery, wearing cotton clothes (cotton clothes were only for the nobles), cutting down a living tree, moving a field boundary making your land bigger, making someone else's smaller, major theft and treason.\nThe Incas.\nThe Incas were a civilized empire in western South America. The Incas are called a \"pre-Columbian\" empire. This means that their country was here before Christopher Columbus. They ruled parts of South America around what is now Peru for a little over 100 years, until the Spanish invasion in the 16th century.\nThe Incan empire or , meaning \"four regions\" in Quechua, only lasted for about 100 years as the arrival of the Spaniards in 1532 conquered them. Their main language was Quechua, but as the Incas were basically made up of many different groups there were probably many other different languages.\nTheir capital was in the city of Cusco, or Qosqo, in what is now southern Peru.\nManco Capac founded the first Inca state around 1200. It covered the area around Cusco. In the 1400s, Pachacuti began to absorb other people in the Andes. The expansion of the Inca Empire had started. The Inca Empire would become the biggest empire in the Americas before Columbus.\nIn 1532, the civil war ended. The brothers Huascar and Atahualpa, fought for who would succeed their father. During this time, the Spanish conquerors took possession of the Inca territory. They were led by Francisco Pizarro. In the following years the conquistadors managed to extend their power over the whole Andean region. They suppressed successive Inca rebellions until the establishment of the Viceroyalty of Per\u00fa in 1542 and the fall of the resistance of the last Incas of Vilcabamba in 1572. The Inca civilization ends at that time, but many cultural traditions remain in some ethnic groups as Quechuas and Aymara people.\nAfrica.\nAncient Egypt and Carthage are well known civilizations of ancient Africa. But because there are not many written sources in large parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, the history of Africa is not easy to write about. But with new techniques such as the recording of oral history, historical linguistics and archeology knowledge has improved, not only for the empires and kingdoms of Ethiopia, Ghana, Mali, Nubia, Kush and Kerma.\nGlobalization.\nFrom colonialization to imperialism.\nThe rise of Europe.\nColonization.\nColonization happened after Christopher Columbus came to the Americas. European countries such as England, France, and Spain built colonies in the Americas. These settlers fought the Native Americans to take over their land. The colonisation of the Americas was the beginning of modern times.\nAn important part about contact with the Americas was the Columbian Exchange The Columbian Exchange brought new foods, ideas, and diseases to the Old World and New World, changing the way people lived. Historians believe that almost everyone as far as Asia was affected in some way by the Columbian Exchange.\nReformation and Counter-Reformation.\nProtestant Reformation started with Martin Luther and the posting of the 95 theses on the door of the castle church in Wittenberg, Germany. At first he protested against corruption such as simony or the sale of indulgences. But then it became clear that he had different ideas about the church doctrine. He thought that Christians should only read the Bible to find out what God wants from them. That meant that they did not need priests (see: Five solas). The three most important traditions that came directly from the Protestant Reformation were the Lutheran, Reformed (Calvinist, Presbyterian, etc.), and Anglican traditions.\nThe Counter-Reformation, or Catholic Reformation, was the Catholic Church fighting the Protestant Reformation. New religious orders, such as the Jesuits were founded and missionaries sent around the world. Decisions were taken at the Council of Trent (1545\u20131563).\nIndustrial revolution.\nThe Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain. It brought many advances in the way goods were produced. These advances allowed people to produce much more than they needed for living. The early British Empire split as its colonies in America revolted to establish a representative government.\nFrom nationalism to imperialism.\nThe French Revolution lead to massive political change in continental Europe, as people following the ideas of Enlightenment asked for human rights with the slogan \"libert\u00e9, egalit\u00e9, fraternit\u00e9\" (liberty, equality, fraternity). That led to the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, but also to terror and the execution of King Louis XVI. The French leader, Napoleon Bonaparte, conquered and changed Europe through war up to 1815. As more and more small property holders were granted the vote, in France and the UK, socialist and trade union activity developed and revolution gripped Europe in 1848. The last vestiges of serfdom were abolished in Austria-Hungary in 1848. Russian serfdom was abolished in 1861. The Balkan nations began to regain their independence from the Ottoman Empire. After the Franco-Prussian War, Italy and Germany became unified in 1870 and 1871. Conflict spread across the globe, in a chase for empires. The search for a \"place in the sun\" ended with the outbreak of World War I. In the desperation of war, the Russian Revolution promised the people \"peace, bread and land\". The defeat of Germany came at the price of economic destruction, which was written down in the Treaty of Versailles.\nAsia.\nChina \u2013 continuity.\nFrom 1644 to 1912 the Qing or \"Manchu Dynasty\" ruled China. The dynasty was founded by the Manchu clan in northeast China (Manchuria). It expanded into China proper and its surrounding territories, establishing the \"Empire of the Great Qing\".\nIts military power weakened during the 1800s, and faced with international pressure, massive rebellions and defeats in wars, the Qing Dynasty declined after the mid-19th century. It was overthrown in 1912.\nJapan.\nDuring the Edo period, Japan had many small rulers. There were about 200 of them, called the daimyo. Out of them, the Tokugawa clan was most powerful. They ruled from a place called Edo. This place was around the present day\u2019s Tokyo. For fifteen generations they were the most powerful clan in Japan.\nBeginning from the early 17th century, the rulers (known as shogunate) started a policy of seclusion (stopping some people coming in), known as sakoku in Japanese language. They suspected that traders, merchants and missionaries wanted to bring Japan under the control of European powers. Except the Dutch and the Chinese, all foreigners, traders and merchants from other countries, missionaries were no longer allowed into Japan.\nStill even during the period of seclusion, Japanese continued to gain information and knowledge about other parts of the world.\nThis policy of seclusion lasted for about 200 years. It ended 1868 with Meiji Restoration, when the emperor took over again and started a lot of reforms.\nIndia \u2013 Mughal Empire.\nThe Mughal Empire existed from 1526 to 1857. When it was biggest it ruled most of the Indian subcontinent, then known as Hindustan, and parts of what is now Afghanistan. It was founded by Babur in 1526 and ruled until 1530. Its most important ruler was Akbar (1556\u20131605). After the death of Aurangjeb (1658\u20131707), the Mughal Empire became weak. It continued until 1857. By that time, India came under the British Raj.\nAmerica.\nSettlement by the Spanish started the European colonization of the Americas, it meant genocide of the native Indians. The Spanish gained control of most of the Caribbean and conquered the Aztecs. So they founded the Spanish Empire in the New World.\nThe first successful English settlements were in North America at Jamestown (Virginia), 1607 (along with its satellite, Bermuda in 1609) and Plymouth (Massachusetts), 1620. The first French settlements were Port Royal (1604) and Quebec City (1608). The Fur Trade soon became the primary business on the continent and as a result transformed the Native Americans lifestyle. Plantation slavery of the West Indies lead to the beginning of the Atlantic slave trade.\nRivalry between the European powers created a series of wars on the North American landmass. The American Revolution led to the creation of the United States of America. Spain's hold on its colonies weakened till it had to give them independence.\nThe United States expanded quickly to the west. At the same time, British built more in Canada.\nAfrica.\nDuring the 15th century the Portuguese began exploring Africa. At the Guinea coast they built their first fort in 1482. They started slave trade after the first European contact with America in 1492 to supply settlers from there with workers. Soon English, Spanish, Dutch, French and Danish merchants also built forts. But their influence on the inland was minor (except from decimation of population by slave trade) till during the 19th century larger colonies were founded.\nTwentieth Century onward.\nThe 20th century was a very important time in history. New technology and different ideas led to many worldwide changes in the time of just 100 years.\nWorld Wars.\nThe First World War.\nWorld War I was a war fought from 1914 to 1918. During the time of the war, it was called \"The Great War\", or \"The War to End All Wars\". Chemical poisons, tanks, aeroplanes, and bombs were used for the first time.\nThere were four main causes of the war:\nThese were causes that made it likely that a war would start in Europe. The \"spark\" that started the war was the assassination of the heir to the throne in Austria-Hungary: Archduke Franz Ferdinand by a group of young Serbians. Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia and each country's allies then joined the war. This created a bigger conflict which turned into World War I.\nEurope divided into two groups of allies: the Central Powers and the Allied Powers (the \"Allies\"). The Central Powers were made up of Germany, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria. The Allies were made up of Britain, France, Russia, Italy and the United States.\nWorld War I was fought on two fronts; the Eastern Front and the Western Front. Trench warfare was commonly used on the Eastern Front.\nBecause of a British blockade, Germany began using U-boats, or submarines, to sink British ships. After the sinking of two ships with Americans on board, and the public release of the Zimmermann Note, The U.S. declared war on Germany, joining the Allies.\nOn November 11, 1918, Germany signed the armistice, meaning \"the laying down of arms\", to end the war. After the war ended, the Treaty of Versailles was written and Germany was made to sign it. They had to pay $33 million in reparations (payment for damage). The influenza pandemic of 1918 spread around the world, killing millions.\nAfter the First War.\nAfter the war the German Empire, the Russian Empire, the Ottoman Empire and Austrian Empire ended and France and Britain got weaker.\nThe 1920s and 1930s had military-related fascist dictators take control of Italy, Germany, Japan and Spain. They were helped by the Great Depression starting in 1929. When Hitler in 1933 had gained power in Germany he prepared World War II.\nThe Second World War.\nOf all the wars ever fought, World War II involved the most countries and killed the most people. More than 60 million people died, making it the worst disaster of all time. It lasted six years in Europe, from 1939 to 1945.\nIt was fought between the Axis Powers (Germany, Italy and Japan) and the Allied Powers. At first the Axis Powers were successful, but that ended in Europe with the Battle of Stalingrad in 1943 and the invasion in Normandy in 1944. But Hitler was able to pursue his plan to annihilate Jews nearly all over Europe. Today, this plan is called the Holocaust.\nIn the Pacific it ended with the battles of Midway and Guadalcanal. Germany surrendered on May 8. The Soviet invasion of Japan led Japan to surrender on August 15, 1945.\nAfter World War II.\nAfter World War II the United Nations was founded in the hope that it could solve arguments among nations and keep wars from happening. Communism spread to Central and Eastern Europe, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania, North Vietnam and North Korea. In 1949, China became communist. During the 1950s and 1960s, many third world countries became communist.\nThis led to the Cold War, a forty-year argument between the United States, the Soviet Union, and their allies (mainly countries that were members of NATO or the Warsaw Pact). Each country wanted to promote their type of government. The Soviet Union wanted to spread communism, and the United States wanted to spread democracy. People across the world feared a nuclear war because of the tension.\nCommunism became less popular when it became clear that it could not promote economic growth as well as Western states and that it was not suited for a reform that allowed freedom of speech for everybody. Therefore, the Soviet Union forced Hungary to give up its reform in 1956, it favored the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 and it stopped reform in Czechoslovakia in 1968. When in 1988/89 Gorbachev made clear that he would not force the countries of the East block to stick to Communism the Berlin Wall was torn down in 1989 and the Soviet Union collapsed (1991). Then the United States was the only superpower left.\nAfter Mao Zedong's death China's communist party proved that economic reform was possible without political freedom and paved the way for enormous economic growth.\nAs the 20th century ended, the European Union began to rise and included former satellite states and even parts of the Soviet Union. States in Asia, Africa and South America tried to copy the European Union.\nThe twentieth century was a time of great progress in terms of technology. People began to live longer because of better medicine and medical technology. New communications and transportation technologies connected the world. But these advances also helped cause problems with the environment.\nThe last half of the century had smaller wars. Improved information technology and globalization increased trade and cultural exchange. Space exploration expanded through the solar system. The structure of DNA was discovered.\nThe same period also raised questions about the end of human history because of global dangers: nuclear weapons, greenhouse effect and other problems in the environment.\n21st century.\nAs the 20th century ended, globalization has continued. During this period, communications with mobile phones and the Internet have expanded, which has led to fundamental social changes in corporation, political, and individuals' personal lives. Due to the population of growth and industrialization, worldwide resource competition is becoming increasingly highly, especially in India, China and Brazil. The increasing demand on the environmental degradation and global warming.\nA new Great Recession affected the world in the late 2000s and the early 2010s, and the COVID-19 pandemic spread in 2020, causing further economic and political disruption. Some scientists referred to this as a \"Planetary Phase of Civilization\"."}
{"id": "42875", "revid": "10700", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42875", "title": "Ur", "text": "Ur was the one of the world's first cities, in Mesopotamia. It was a Sumerian city-state, founded around 3,800\u00a0BC. There are written records dating from the 26th century. Ur was once a coastal city near the mouth of the River Euphrates on the Persian Gulf. It is now well inland, south of the Euphrates on its right bank, from Nasiriyah, Iraq.\nZiggurat.\nIn the Sumerian city, the Ziggurat of Ur was a skyscraper over the city. It was about 20\u00a0metres (66\u00a0feet) tall. The only level that remains today is the bottom. There were big staircases to get up and down. They tell a lot about the people who built them. Sumerians had no tools and machinery like us. They were careful brick builders. Brickmakers formed mud bricks that were perfect. After drying they took them to the site and set them in place with bitumen. Bitumen is a thick sticky black stuff. It's like asphalt, the stuff they use to pave roads. They braided reeds so they would be stronger, and hooked them up like steel cables. Later the Ziggurat became more than a place for gods. There were workshops for craftworkers. For the priests, there were temples to do worship. \nSocial classes.\nUr had three social classes. The richer, like government officials, priests, and soldiers, were at the top. The second level was for merchants, teachers, laborers, farmers and craftmakers. The bottom were for slaves captured in battle. Burials at Ur give insight into people's social standing. Kings and queens were buried with treasure. Since irrigation gave Ur abundant crops, not everybody needed to work on farms. People learned other skills. Sir Leonard Woolley found a tablet that listed Ur's special workers. The chisel workers made sculptures, the gem cutters made gems, and the fullers stomped on woven wools to make them soft. The metal workers made weapons."}
{"id": "42880", "revid": "983938", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42880", "title": "Odenwald", "text": "The Odenwald is a mountain chain in the south of Hesse, in the north of Bavaria and the north of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. \nGeography.\nIn the south of the Odenwald there is the Neckar River. In the east there is the Main River . In the west there is the valley of the Rhine River. The highest mountain is the Katzenbuckel (literally \"cat's hump\", 626\u00a0m).\nNeighboring cities.\nThe big cities Mannheim and Frankfurt am Main are near to the Odenwald. People of these cities like to go there at holidays. It is known for its clean thin air. There are many marked hiking paths. You can find wild blueberries, strawberries and mushrooms in the forests. \nSeveral small towns are very beautiful like Weinheim on the Bergstra\u00dfe and Michelstadt. The mild climate of the area is well known. "}
{"id": "42885", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42885", "title": "The Worlds History", "text": ""}
{"id": "42886", "revid": "233259", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42886", "title": "Sviatoslav I, Prince of Kiev", "text": "Sviatoslav I was an early ruler of the Kievan Rus', a nation that evolved into modern Ukraine. He was the son of Igor I of Kiev and Olga of Kiev. He ruled from 962 until 972. During his reign he destroyed the Khazar Empire and for a short time conquered what is now Bulgaria."}
{"id": "42889", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42889", "title": "List of citrus fruits", "text": "Citrus is a common term and genus of flowering plants in the family Rutaceae. It originated in tropical and subtropical southeast Asia. The name comes from the citron.\nCitrus fruits usually have a sour taste but farmers grow more of the sweet ones. There are many types of citrus fruits in the world."}
{"id": "42895", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42895", "title": "Citrus fruits", "text": ""}
{"id": "42899", "revid": "7814177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42899", "title": "Daylight Saving Time", "text": "Daylight Saving Time (DST) or Summer Time (ST) is a time to time keep during summer. During the summer months, the sun stays visible for a longer time, and sunset happens late in the day. For this reason, certain countries advance the time by one hour near the start of summer, and put it back one hour during autumn.\nDST helps stores that sell to people after they get off work, and it doesn't hurt farmers and others whose hours are set by the sun. It cuts traffic accident rates. Sometimes it can reduce energy costs, but it can also increase them. \nMost of the world's countries do not use DST, but it is common in Europe and North America.\nThe United States, Australia, the United Kingdom, Canada and many other countries have DST. These countries also have regions that do not have DST:\nIceland, Russia, Belarus, and some parts of Ukraine are countries in Europe without DST.\nUS dates and UK Time.\nSince 1971 all clocks in the European Union, of which the UK is a member state, have changed on same dates and at the same time, 06:00 GMT.\nAgainst are many farmers in northerly latitudes, because sunrise would occur in winter at about 10:00 in the morning. However, in March 2010 the National Farmers Union said that it was not against Single/Double Summer Time, and is in fact relatively neutral, with many farmers expressing a preference for the change\nAutomatic adjustment.\nSome computers connected to the Internet will automatically adjust their clocks for DST. Most newer computers will not adjust or will adjust the time incorrectly or on the wrong date. Also, computers with more than one operating system may be incorrectly adjusted twice or more when each operating system boots."}
{"id": "42910", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42910", "title": "Lanthanum", "text": "Lanthanum is a chemical element. It has the chemical symbol La. It has the atomic number 57. It is part of a group of chemical elements in the periodic table named the Lanthanides. It is a rare earth element. It is silvery white, malleable and ductile. It is soft and can be cut with a knife."}
{"id": "42914", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42914", "title": "Rowing", "text": "Rowing is about moving a boat on water using human muscle power. It can be a sport. The goal in rowing is to move as fast as possible on top of the water. The athletes use a boat. They move the boat forward by using two sculls or one oar. There are different types of rowing. The types depend on how many people are in the boat and if they have a coxswain or not. Rowing is a very popular sport in England, the Commonwealth, and the Northeastern United States. The old universities of the United States and England have yearly rowing matches."}
{"id": "42916", "revid": "669563", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42916", "title": "Inkjet printer", "text": "An Inkjet printer is a printer for computers. It uses special ink to print on the paper. Another type of printing technology is the Laser printer. Inkjet printers are preferred for printing photos and graphics due to their high-quality color output, whereas laser printers are preferred for printing text due to their high contrast and speed.\nUsually, inkjet printers are used by people who print very little. The ink comes in special ink cartridges, which can be very expensive and uneconomical. Also, the ink in the cartridge may dry up. This means that a new cartridge is needed. Three colors of cartridges, which combine magenta, yellow and cyan inks are used to create color tones. A black cartridge is also used for crisp monochrome output. Some professional printers have one or more additional colors for better photo quality, such as light cyan, light magenta, blue, red, green, orange, and grey.\nInkjet printers may use either dye or pigment inks. Pigment inks are less likely to fade, whereas dye inks create more-realistic photos and are less likely to clog the printhead.\nMany professionals use inkjet printers to print on very large surfaces (up to 5m width). These printers usually do not use cartridges, but have a continuous supply of ink that could last for a long time. Standard-size (A4 or US Letter) printers with a continuous ink supply are also available.\nInkjet printers need special paper. This paper has been treated so that the ink does not smear. \nLess expensive inkjet printers, which cost a little more than 100 US dollars, are a bargain for users who want to be able to print pages in color. Inkjet printers can be very cheap but the ink can also be rather expensive. Some professional inkjet printers can print on surfaces other than paper, such as CDs/DVDs or plastic cards.\nAn inkjet printer can print between 300 and 720 DPI (Dots Per Inch). Some newer printers can print at higher resolutions, although the benefit of resolutions beyond 720 DPI may not be noticed by the human eye.\nA common problem with inkjet printers is that if the printhead is clogged, banding (stripes) will appear in the printed image. To fix this, the printhead needs to be cleaned using the software included with the printer. This problem occurs most often when the printer has not been used for a long time. To prevent this from happening on rarely-used printers, a cron job can be scheduled to print a purge sheet (an image containing all colors used by the printer) once per day. A small, barely noticeable (usually only noticeable by magnification) amount of banding will occur even with a perfectly clean printhead due to the way the printer works."}
{"id": "42917", "revid": "669563", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42917", "title": "Laser printer", "text": "A laser printer is a printer for computers. It uses laser or LED-technology to get small particles of toner from a cartridge onto paper. Very often, this costs less to use than the ink of inkjet printers. Laser printers often print text more neatly than inkjet printers, but print photos less clearly. Printing on photo paper or coated paper designed for inkjet printers can damage the laser printer's drum and fuser unit.\nThe laser printer was first invented by a team at Xerox in 1969. The first laser printer was called the Xerox 2000.\nProcess.\nLaser printing is a process which typically involves seven steps:"}
{"id": "42919", "revid": "1057016", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42919", "title": "Lawrencium", "text": "Lawrencium is a chemical element. It is also named eka-lutetium by some people. It has the symbol Lr. It has the atomic number 103. It is a radioactive element that does not exist in nature. It has to be made. Lawrencium is made from californium. The isotope that has the longest half-life (262Lr) has a half life of about 3.6 hours.\nNo uses for lawrencium are known. What lawrencium looks like is not known because not enough has been made to see it with human eyesight.\nIs a Block-D Group3 Period 7 element. Discovered by Albert Ghiorso and co-workers in 1961, in California. Named after Ernest O. Lawrence, inventor of the cyclotron, a research instrument with which several new elements have been found/made."}
{"id": "42921", "revid": "11487", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42921", "title": "Grat Coalition", "text": ""}
{"id": "42928", "revid": "242253", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42928", "title": "Savannah", "text": ""}
{"id": "42937", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42937", "title": "Darmstadtium", "text": "Darmstadtium is a chemical element. It has been named ununnilium (Uun) or eka-platinum but is now named darmstadtium. It has the symbol Ds. It has the atomic number 110. It is a transuranium element.\nThe element is named in honor of German city Darmstadt.\nDarmstadtium is a radioactive element that does not exist in nature. It has to be made. The isotopes with an atomic mass from 267 to 273 have very short half-lifes. The half life of these isotopes is measured in milliseconds. Isotopes of darmstadtium with an atomic mass of 279 and 281 were synthesised after the other isotopes. Ds-279 and Ds-281 decay more slowly. The isotope with an atomic mass of 279 has a half life of 180 milliseconds and Ds-281 has a half life of 11.1\u00a0seconds.\nNo uses for darmstadtium are known. What darmstadtium looks like is not known because not enough has been made to see it with human eyesight.\nHistory.\nDarmstadtium was first made on November 9, 1994. It was made at the Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Schwerionenforschung (GSI) in Darmstadt, Germany. Only a few atoms of it were made. It was made by bombarding a lead target with nickel. A nuclear fusion reaction happened and made the element.\nThis is shown by the equation below that is the reaction that happened. Pb is the symbol for lead, Ni is the symbol for nickel and n is the symbol for a neutron.\nThe element was named for Darmstadt which was the place of its discovery. The GSI is in Wixhausen, a part of the north of the city of Darmstadt. The new name (darmstadtium) was given to the chemical element by the IUPAC in August 2003."}
{"id": "42939", "revid": "7122510", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42939", "title": "Wampanoag", "text": "The Wampanoag were a Native American tribe. They lived in what is now the American region of New England. The Wampanoag tribe helped the English settlers to survive, after they arrived in the \"Mayflower\".\nThey caught a bacterial infection called leptospirosis or Weil's syndrome in the early 17th century. It caused a many deaths and damaged their society greatly, though their descendents still survive today."}
{"id": "42940", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42940", "title": "Mandir", "text": "Hindu temple or Mandir is referred to a place where Hindus go to worship gods in the form of various deities. Many Hindu temples are filled with wooden and stone arts like pashupatinath temple. A mandir is a spiritual place for Hindus. It is the landmarks around which ancient arts, community celebrations and economy were developed. as well as this the mandir has been recognised for\nIt is believed that the Murtis are stone or wooden images of idols ceremonially infused with the divine presence of God. They worship with arts and other ceremonies.\nPurpose.\nHindus believe that gods and goddesses will answer the prayers of the faithful and inspire spiritually. For them, the temple also acts as a contact between the gods and goddesses and the worshipers. They also believe that the gods and goddesses will grant their wishes and protect them from danger.\nAppearance.\nIn Hinduism gods are represented in various forms. Sometimes gods or goddesses are represented in a human form like Shiva, Vishnu, Saraswati or Kali. Sometimes there are gods goddesses in human and animal fused form like Ganesh. Sometimes they are also represented in plants and non-living form like Tulsi and Shaligrams. Murtis are made according to the prescriptios of the ilpasastra, and then installed by priests through the prana pratishtha ceremony. Afterward the divine personality is believed to be present in the Murtis.\nMethod.\nTo show respect, Hindus give gifts and food to the murtis. They are treated with respect and worshipped everyday. If a temple is a family temple it is treated as part of the family. Some Hindus also offer a part of their daily food to the god or goddess. They are given clothes and are changed at certain times. When people.."}
{"id": "42941", "revid": "21928", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42941", "title": "Babes in Toyland", "text": ""}
{"id": "42948", "revid": "7856657", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42948", "title": "Kitchener, Ontario", "text": "Kitchener is a city in Ontario, Canada. Kitchener is in Southwestern Ontario and is near Toronto, Hamilton, Mississauga and London. It is in Waterloo Region. Other cities in Waterloo Region include Waterloo and Cambridge. Sometimes Kitchener, Waterloo, and Cambridge are known as the \"technology triangle\". It is on the Grand River, which leads to Lake Erie.\nHistory.\nAt first, Kitchener was called Berlin. When World War I started it seemed like a bad idea to have a city named after the capital of Germany. The city was renamed Kitchener, after a British general, Herbert Kitchener. Kitchener then slowly became a prosperous city as it is today.\nFuture.\nA rapid transit system is planned to be added in the Waterloo Region.\nMedia.\nCKCO CTV Television Network\nCFCA Virgin 105.3\nCKKW 1090\nCKWR 98.5"}
{"id": "42949", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42949", "title": "Spring (water)", "text": "A spring is a place where groundwater flows out of the ground. A spring may flow the whole year or only sometimes. This depends on the water getting into the ground all of the time (rain) or only once in a while (snow melting).\nWater from a spring often flows downhill, along the land. This is how rivers start.\nSome springs produce water that is good for health reasons. Sometimes towns grow by these springs because many people who are ill come there to get better. Such towns are called spa towns."}
{"id": "42951", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42951", "title": "Thorium", "text": "Thorium is a chemical element in actinide group. It is a weakly radioactive metal. It has a shiny, silvery white color. It has the chemical symbol Th and the atomic number 90. Natural thorium has an atomic weight of 232. Thorium is named after Thor, the Norse god of thunder. Its ores are found in nature, especially in India, the United States, and Australia. \nMany scientists believe thorium would make a good source of nuclear fuel because it makes much less waste and is four times as common as uranium, and does not undergo the wasteful process of enrichment. It makes 3,200,000 times as much energy as coal and 200 times as much energy as uranium, because natural uranium is mostly non-fissile isotopes. Scientists believe that there is enough of it to power the world for thousands of years. Thorium has been used for various purposes since the 19th century. It is an alloying agent in magnesium and is also used as an industrial catalyst.\nThorium is safer than uranium. This is because thorium cannot undergo fission on its own. Usually, plutonium is need to start and maintain a reaction. This is why thorium is considered better for nuclear reactors. Also, nuclear waste from thorium reactors contains far smaller amounts of dangerous transuranic elements than waste from uranium reactors."}
{"id": "42952", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42952", "title": "River source", "text": "The source of a river or stream is the original point from which the river flows. It may be a lake, a marsh, a spring or a glacier. This is where the stream starts.\nThe source is the farthest point of the river stream from its estuary or its confluence with another river or stream. Rivers are usually fed by many tributaries. The farthest stream is called the head-stream or head water. There is sometimes disagreement on which source is the head water, hence on which is the true source. \nA lake fed by many rivers is sometimes called the source of the bigger river flowing out of it. For example, Lake Victoria is often called the source of the Nile, as the rivers that flow into it have names of their own. \nHeadwaters are usually in mountains. Glacial headwaters are made by melting of glaciers.\nThe source is where a river begins, and the river mouth is where it joins the sea. The mouth may be in the form of a river delta. The joining of a streams is called a confluence. "}
{"id": "42953", "revid": "6965253", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42953", "title": "Laserdisc", "text": "A Laserdisc, like a DVD, can play video of a higher quality than VHS. A Laserdisc is much larger than a DVD. To play Laserdisc movies, a LaserDisc player is needed. LaserDisc was also known by the names DiscoVision and LaserVision.\nLaserdisc was first produced by MCA in 1978, and became well known in the 1980s. Movie companies stopped making Laserdisc movies when DVDs became well known in the late 1990s. Today some of the better Laserdisc players still sell for $1,000 USD or more.\nTechnology.\nLaser Discs work like a regular CD-ROM or DVD. The surface of the disc is covered with small holes that are read by a laser. This sequence of holes and no holes is turned into pictures and sound by the Laserdisc player. Most Laserdiscs can hold about 30 minutes to an hour of video per side for a total of 1 to 2 hours per disc.\nThe early Laserdisc players used a Helium-Neon laser to read the disc, but the later models used infrared lasers. The first units that were made with the infrared laser had some problems such as skipping, strange colors spots, and fuzziness. These problems were fixed in later models.\nSome of the later Laserdisc players made were ones that could play Audio CDs as well as Laserdiscs. In Japan, one of the last models to be produced even had the ability to play DVDs as well as CDs and Laserdiscs."}
{"id": "42956", "revid": "830159", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42956", "title": "Californium", "text": "Californium is a chemical element. It is a radioactive metal. It has the chemical symbol Cf. It has the atomic number 98. Californium is a transuranium element. Californium does not have many uses. It was discovered by bombarding a curium target with alpha particles (helium ions). Californium is named after the US State of California, where it was discovered, in the University of Berkeley.\nCalifornium is produced in nuclear reactors and particle accelerators. \nThere are 20 known isotopes. The most stable is californium-251, which has a half-life of 898 years. This short half-life means the element is not found in the Earth's crust. Californium-252, whose half-life is 2.645 years, is the most common isotope used.\nCompounds of californium are mostly of californium(III), which can take part in three chemical bonds. Californium can be used to help start up nuclear reactors, and is used as a source of neutrons. It can be used in making higher mass elements. Ununoctium was synthesized by bombarding californium-249 atoms with calcium-48 ions.\nSafety.\nWhen californium is used, workers must be protected from the element's ability to disrupt the formation of red blood cells."}
{"id": "42959", "revid": "10495", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42959", "title": "Menuetos", "text": ""}
{"id": "42960", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42960", "title": "Torgau", "text": "Torgau is a town on the banks of the Elbe in northwestern Saxony, Germany. The town is well known as the place where during the Second World War, United States Army forces met with forces of the Soviet Union during the invasion of Germany on April 25, 1945.\nThis marked the beginning of the line of contact between Soviet and American forces, but not the occcupation zones. In fact the area surrounding Torgau at first occupied by U.S. forces was later, in July 1945, given over to Soviet forces."}
{"id": "42963", "revid": "1140831", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42963", "title": "Chemical bond", "text": "Chemical bond is a type of attraction force which holds together different chemical species. Atoms bonded stay together unless the needed amount of energy is transferred to the bond. \nIn general, strong chemical bonding comes with the sharing or transfer of electrons between the participating atoms. The atoms in molecules, crystals, metals and diatomic gases are held together by chemical bonds. \nThere are two types of bonds; covalent and ionic. Covalent bonds form when atoms share electrons. Ionic bonding is the attraction between oppositely charged ions. Chemical bonds are negatively charged electrons that are pulling protons into each other.\nBecause atoms and molecules are three-dimensional, it is difficult to use a single method to indicate orbitals and bonds. In molecular formulas the chemical bonds between atoms are indicated in different ways depending on the type of discussion.\nA common way chemists describe chemical bonds is through the number of electrons each atom has on itself. Each atom is drawn with the number of electrons as dots or lines to form a maximum of eight. If the electrons form a chemical bond then a line is drawn between the two electrons. The number of bonds developed increases the number of lines.\nBonds can be double bonds or triple bonds"}
{"id": "42965", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42965", "title": "Physical property", "text": "A physical property is a property, quality or way that an object is. A physical property can always be measured without changing or making the object chemically different or different in a way that would effect its chemical or atomic structure. There are two types of physical properties: \"intensive\" and \"extensive\"."}
{"id": "42967", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42967", "title": "Concept", "text": "A concept is an idea that is applied to all objects in a group. It is the way people see and understand something. The name used to identify a concept (the concept's label) is a \"term\". For example, the word \"Dog\" is the term to identify the concept of what a dog is. Everything that a person knows about a dog is the concept of the term dog. \nDifferent terms can be used to identify the same concept. Car and Automobile are synonyms for the same concept. Different languages have different terms for the same concept. This is what makes translation possible. The terms may be different in each language, but the concept is the same. The concept of jumping is the same to a person from England and a person from Italy, but one person uses the term \"Jump\" to mean the concept and the other person uses \"Salto\"."}
{"id": "42968", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42968", "title": "Kenpo", "text": "Kenpo or kempo is the descriptive name of various Japanese martial arts with Chinese origins, and also of hybrid martial arts: the Japanese ones and the Chinese ones. Kenpo is similar to karate and includes more punches and kicks than holds or joint locks of wrestling. \nMore known styles of Kenpo.\nKempo is a Japanese Martial Arts form. However, unlike Karate, its origins are linked back to China and still have very strong influences from Chinese systems. \nIt is not uncommon for a Kempo artist to both use traditional Japanese and Chinese style techniques. The difference lies in that because of the Chinese influence, the Japanese moves tend to emphasize more fluidity than most of the other Japanese styles. And because of the Japanese influence, there is a stronger focus for shorter stances and movements than other Chinese styles.\nFor the same reason that many other styles are sometimes simply listed as \"karate\", Kempo has long been strongly linked under the general banner of \"karate\". Kempo is known for its near explosive, short-ranged attacks that often move faster than the opponent can see. \nKempo has a very strong presence in Hawaii, the home base for many of the systems under Kempo that exist today in the United States. Throughout each of the histories of the different groups there are strong signs of the continued merging of both Chinese and Japanese influences."}
{"id": "42971", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42971", "title": "Kempo", "text": ""}
{"id": "42977", "revid": "606951", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42977", "title": "Edge", "text": "Edge can mean:"}
{"id": "42979", "revid": "495963", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42979", "title": "Tyr", "text": "Tyr is a god in Norse mythology. In the Eddas, he is either the son of Odin or Hymir. He is the god of single (man-to-man) combat. Tyr only has one hand.\nHow Tyr lost his hand.\nAt one point in time, the gods decided that the wolf Fenrir (also called \"Fenriswolf\") could no longer go free. They wanted to lock him up onto a chain. But he broke every chain they tried to put on him. Finally, they had the dwarves make a magical chain. But Fenrir sensed what the gods would do. So Fenrir asked that one of them put his hand into his mouth. Knowing that if Fenrir was left unfettered, he would have grown strong enough to kill all the God's and destroy the world. Tyr was the only one who had the courage. When Fenrir sensed he had been tricked, he bit off Tyr's hand. Tyr remained handless forever.\nFenrir will remain bound until Ragnar\u00f6k. Then, Tyr's opponent will be , the guard dog of Hel."}
{"id": "42981", "revid": "1155918", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42981", "title": "Loki", "text": " \nIn\u00a0Norse mythology,\u00a0Loki (Anglicized /\u02c8lo\u028aki/) is a\u00a0god\u00a0or\u00a0j\u00f6tunn. The son of Laufey and the [male] j\u00f6tunn F\u00e1rbauti (Old Norse: \u201ccruel striker\u201d), Lokie is often referred to as the god of trickery and mischief, and is Odin's blood brother. Known as the \u201cFather of Monsters,\u201d Loki has sired a variety of creatures; these include the monstrous wolf Fenrir, and the Midgard Serpent, J\u00f6rmungandr, both of whom were born to him by the giantess (j\u00f6tunn) Angrbo\u00f0a. He is married to the goddess Sigyn, by whom he is the father of Narfi and/or Nari. By the stallion\u00a0Sva\u00f0ilfari\ufffc, Loki is the father, giving birth in the formation of a\u00a0mare (female horse), of the eighet-legged horse\u00a0Sleipnir. \nLoki has a complicated relationship with the \u00c6sir, oftentimes assisting them or hindering them in bringing heir goals to fruition. He is also a friend of Thorie."}
{"id": "42983", "revid": "7418344", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42983", "title": "Freyja", "text": "Freyja (Old Norse: \u201c[the]\u00a0Lady\u201d) is the goddess of love, beauty, sex, fertility,\u00a0sei\u00f0r, war, and death in Norse mythology. A member of the\u00a0Vanir, Freyja is the daughter of\u00a0Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, and twin sister of Freyr. The most beautiful and refined of the goddesses, she owns the necklace\u00a0Br\u00edsingamen, and rides in a chariot pulled by two cats, accompanied by a giant boar named Hildisv\u00edni; in addition to this, Freyja possesses a cloak of\u00a0falcon feathers. She is married to the god\u00a0\u00d3\u00f0r, by whom she is the mother of the twin goddesses\u00a0Hn\u00f6ss and\u00a0Gersemi. Freyja rules over the heavenly field(s) of\u00a0F\u00f3lkvangr, where she receives half of those that die in battle, as the other half go to Valhalla. The minor goddesses Gefjon,\u00a0Ska\u00f0i,\u00a0\u00deorger\u00f0r H\u00f6lgabr\u00fa\u00f0r and Irpa\u00a0(Old Norse: literally \u201c\u00deorger\u00f0r, H\u01eblgi\u2019s bride\u201d), and\u00a0Mengl\u00f6\u00f0 all serve as her handmaidens. \nHer name is often translated into English as Freya when used nowadays, but the original Norwegian name is spelt \"Freyja.\"\nReceiver of the slain.\nThe Valkyries, having chosen who is to live and die in battle, collect the souls of those slain and bring them to Valhalla, where they will feast and make revelry with Odin; Freyja herself shares half of these heroes with Odin. Her sacred realm is the field of F\u00f3lkvangr, wherein lies her great hall Sessr\u00famnir. There, Freyja decides where her warriors shall sit.\nThis is what is written in the original myth:\n\"The ninth hall is Folkvang, where bright Freyja decides\"\n\"Where her warriors shall sit,\"\n\"Some of the slain belong to her,\"\n\"Some belong to Odin.\"\nBride of the Odr.\nFreyja married a god called \u00d3\u00f0r. She loves her husband deeply, but he often went away on long journeys, and Freyja cried red golden tears for him. Her tears become gold and amber when they fall to Earth, therefore gold was called \"Freyja's tears\". They have two beautiful daughters called Hnoss and Gersemi.\nOwner of Brisingamen.\nFreyja often rides in a chariot pulled by big blue cats (her sacred animal) or on a golden boar named Hildisv\u00edni, who accompanies her in battle. Freyja was renowned for her loveliness and beauty, as the myths tell of three giants who wanted to marry her, but they were all killed by Thor, the god of thunder.\nFreyja also has a precious necklace called Br\u00edsingamen. The god Loki once stole this necklace, and Freyja had to ask the guardian Heimdall for help. Heimdallr engaged Loki in combat and won against the Trickster, giving the necklace back to Freyja. For this, Loki is also called \"Thief of Brisingamen\", and Heimdall is also called \"Seeker of Brisingamen\".\nThrymr, the king of the j\u01ebtnar, once stole Thor's hammer, Mj\u00f6lnir. When Loki went to J\u00f6tunheimr to retrieve the hammer, he found Thrymr, who revealed that he planned to give Mj\u00f6lnir to Freyja as a wedding gift, as he requested her hand in marriage. When Loki returned to Asgard to deliver the news, Freyja was so angered that the heavens shook, and the necklace Brisingamen broke. When it was decided that Thor would go to Thrymr posing as Freyja (Loki disguised himself as one of the goddess' maidservants), he borrowed the necklace. Upon their arrival, Thrymr threw a huge feast in celebration of the marriage, as he presented Mj\u00f6lnir to \"Freyja\" as a wedding gift; Thor then took his hammer, killing Thrymr and all who attended the wedding.\nJobs.\nFreyja is a warrior goddess. Whenever she rides into battles, she gets half of the souls of dead heroes. She is also a practitioner of magic, otherwise known as sei\u00f0r, and is highly proficient in using it. She has a magical cloak made of falcon feathers which allows her to fly between different worlds.\nFreyja is the patron goddess of crops and childbirths. She is also a goddess of love, whom lovers may send prayers to.\nFrigg and Freyja were two of the most revered goddesses in Norse mythology. They were especially worshipped by Vikings. Freyja is said to be the kindest among goddesses. In a poem in the Poetic Edda, a young man called Ottar always trusted in the goddesses; he built a rock shrine for the goddesses, and Freyja answered his prayers. She disguised Ottar as her golden boar, and went on a trip to help him find his ancestors.\nAfter Ragnarok.\nIn final battle of Ragnar\u00f6k, Odin, and Freyr will die. Freyja is not stated as having died during Ragnar\u00f6k or surviving.\nNames.\nFreyr's name means \"the Lord\", and Freyja's name means \"the Lady\".\nThe day of the week, Friday, is named either after her, or after Odin's wife Frigg. Before Christianity became the dominant religion of the region, the Orion constellation was called Frigg's distaff or Freyja's girdle. Frigg and Freyja may be one and the same goddess.\nFreyja is also widely known as Vanadis (Old Norse: Vanad\u00eds - \"Lady of the Vanir\"). The metallic element Vanadium was named after her. The Vanir are close relatives of elves. Freyr is the Lord of the elves, and his sacred realm is Alfheim, home of the elves.\nAnother well-known name of Freyja is Gefn, which means \"Giver\", a suitable name for the fertility goddess.\nFreyja represents the Norse women of the Viking Age, whose husbands often went away to war. From Freyja's name, noble Norse women were called Fru, and wives were called house-fru. Frau means \"woman\" in German.\nFreya and Freja are now common Scandinavian female names."}
{"id": "42984", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42984", "title": "Freya", "text": ""}
{"id": "42985", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42985", "title": "Freja", "text": ""}
{"id": "42986", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42986", "title": "Frigg", "text": " \nFrigg (or Frigga) is the goddess of marriage, family, and motherhood in Norse mythology. She is the wife of\u00a0Odin (chief of the\u00a0\u00c6sir), by whom she is the mother of\u00a0Baldr and\u00a0H\u00f6\u00f0r, and stepmother of Thor (Odin's eldest son) and V\u00ed\u00f0arr. Ruling Asgard as queen alongside the All-Father, Frigg often dwells in the dense, foggy lands of\u00a0Fensalir\u00a0(Old Norse: \u201cHalls of Fen\u201d) when her husband is away on one of his quests for knowledge; additionally, she is the only one besides Odin permitted to sit on his throne Hli\u00f0skj\u00e1lf, and look out across the Nine Realms. Serving as Frigg's attendants are Eir, the gods' doctor and goddess of healing, Hl\u00edn (a goddess of protection), Gn\u00e1 (a messenger goddess), and Fulla (a fertility goddess). It is unclear whether Frigg's companions and attendants are simply different aspects of Frigg herself (cf. avatar). "}
{"id": "42987", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42987", "title": "Frigga", "text": ""}
{"id": "42990", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42990", "title": "William Wallace", "text": "William Wallace was a Scottish knight who fought the King of England (Edward I) in the Middle Ages. He was born in c. 1270, and executed by the English on 23 August 1305. Scotland had been claimed by Edward, and Wallace refused allegiance to Edward.\nOrigins.\nWallace was probably born around 1270-1272. Little is known about his birth or childhood. Exactly where and when Wallace was born is not very clear. Some people say he was born about 1272, but a book printed in the 16th century called \"History of William Wallace and Scottish Affairs\" says he was born in 1276. Tradition says he was born in Elderslie, near Paisley in Renfrewshire. There are links with Ayrshire as well, and it is not clear whether Wallace first fought the English in Ayrshire or Lanark. Tradition sees Wallace as a being a 'commoner', or normal person. Robert the Bruce, who also fought the English, was seen as being more noble. But this is not strictly true because Wallace's family were minor nobles.\nThe struggle.\nKing Edward offered Scotland a deal which allowed them to have a Scottish king so long as King Edward was still in charge. This required the Scottish nobles to kneel, and swear allegiance to his sovereignty. Wallace refused, and led the resistance which followed. A series of battles were fought:\nCapture and execution.\nWallace evaded capture by the English until 5 August 1305 when John de Menteith, a Scottish knight loyal to Edward, turned Wallace over to English soldiers at Robroyston near Glasgow. Wallace was taken to London at Westminster Hall, where he was tried for treason. He replied to the charge, \"I could not be a traitor to Edward, for I was never his subject\". Wallace was however found guilty.\nAfter the trial, on 23 August 1305, Wallace was taken from the hall, stripped naked and dragged through the city at the heels of a horse to the Elms at Smithfield. He was hanged, drawn and quartered\u2013the most terrible execution in English law. It meant he was strangled by hanging but released while he was still alive, his body cut open, and his bowels burnt before him. Then he was beheaded, and his body cut into four parts. His preserved head (dipped in tar) was placed on a pike atop London Bridge. It was later joined by the heads of the brothers John and Simon Fraser, who had been colleagues of Wallace. Wallace's limbs were displayed, separately, in Newcastle upon Tyne, Berwick-upon-Tweed, Stirling, and Aberdeen. \nNotes.\nA book called \"The Acts and Deeds of Sir William Wallace, Knight of Elderslie\" was written by a minstrel named Blind Harry in the 15th century. The book is written more like a story than a true version of his life, and has led to much of the legends around William Wallace. The film Braveheart is based on the novel.\nA plaque stands in a wall of St Bartholomew's Hospital near the site of Wallace's execution at Smithfield. In 2002 William Wallace was ranked as number 48 of the \"100 Greatest Britons\" in an extensive UK poll conducted by the BBC."}
{"id": "42992", "revid": "13", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42992", "title": "Middle ages", "text": ""}
{"id": "42994", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42994", "title": "\u00c6sir", "text": "The \u00c6sir (Old Norse: singular \"\u01eb\u0301ss\" or \"\u00e1ss\"; feminine \"\u00e1synja\", plural \"\u00e1synjur\") are the principal group or tribe of deities in Norse mythology. Including Odin, Frigg, Thor, and Baldr, the \u00c6sir reside in the realm of Asgard, situated at the top of Yggdrasil's highest branch. Alongside the \u00c6sir exists a second family of gods known as the Vanir, who joined with the \u00c6sir to form a single, unified pantheon after the devastating war between the two tribes of deities. The Vanir were native to Vanaheimr, the god Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and his children, Freyr and Freyja chief among them. The \u00c6sir gods were usually connected with power and war, while the Vanir were associated with fertility and nature.\nNorse mythology.\nThe things that happened between the \u00c6sir and the Vanir are an interesting part of Norse mythology. While other cultures have had \"elder\" and \"younger\" generations of gods, as with the Titans and the Olympians of ancient Greece, the \u00c6sir and Vanir were portrayed as contemporaries. The two tribes fought battles, concluded treaties, and exchanged hostages; Freyr and Freyja were said to be hostages. Some believe that events that occurred between the \u00c6sir and Vanir were a reflection of events common between different Norse clans at the time.\nThe \u00c6sir did not grow old, instead remaining young by eating the apples of I\u00f0unn. While they did not age, they could be killed. It was said that most of them will die at Ragnar\u00f6k."}
{"id": "42999", "revid": "7660634", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42999", "title": "Braveheart", "text": "Braveheart is an American historical war drama movie starring Mel Gibson and Sophie Marceau. It is loosely based around the life of 13th century Scottish warrior William Wallace, who fought against the English when they occupied Scotland."}
{"id": "43000", "revid": "1091227", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43000", "title": "Semiconductor", "text": "A semiconductor is a material that in some cases will conduct electricity but not in others. Good electrical conductors, like copper or silver, easily allow electricity to flow through them. Materials that block the flow of electricity, like rubber or plastic, are called insulators. Insulators are often used to protect people from electric shock. As the name implies, a semiconductor does not conduct as well as a conductor. Silicon is the most used semiconductor, but gallium arsenide is also used.\nBy the addition of different atoms into the crystal lattice (grid) of the semiconductor it changes its conductivity by making n-type and p-type semiconductors. Silicon is the most important commercial semiconductor, though many others are used. They can be made into transistors, which are small amplifiers. Transistors are used in computers, mobile phones, digital audio players and many other electronic devices.\nLike other solids, the electrons in semiconductors can have energies only within certain bands (i.e. ranges of energy levels) between the energy of the ground state, corresponding to electrons tightly bound to the atomic nuclei of the material, and the free electron energy, which is the energy required for an electron to escape entirely from the material.\nHistory.\nSemiconductors were being studied in laboratories as early as the 1830s. In 1833 Michael Faraday was experimenting with silver sulfide. He discovered that as the material was heated it conducted electricity better. This was the opposite of how copper acted. When copper is heated it conducts less electricity. A number of other early experimenters discovered other properties of semiconductors. In 1947 at Bell Labs in New Jersey, the transistor was invented. This led to the development of integrated circuits, which power almost all electronic devices today.\nDoping.\nDoping is the process of adding a small impurity to a pure semiconductor to change its electrical properties. Lightly and moderately doped semiconductors are called extrinsic. A semiconductor doped to such high levels that it acts more like a conductor than a semiconductor is referred to as degenerate. Most semiconductors are made out of silicon crystals. Pure silicon has little use but doped silicon is the basis for most semiconductors. Silicon Valley was named for the large number of semiconductor startup companies that were located there.\nSemiconductors today.\nToday, semiconductors are used far and wide. Semiconductors can be found in nearly every electronic device. Desktop computers, the Internet, tablet devices, smartphones all would not be possible without semiconductors.\nSemiconductors can be made into very precise switches with a small amount of voltage. The voltage that the semiconductor doesn\u2019t need can be sent to other electrical components in the device. Semiconductors can also be made very tiny and many of them can fit into a rather small circuit. Since they can be made so small, electrical devices today can be made thin and lightweight without compromising processing power.\nSome of the dominating companies in the semiconductor business are Intel Corporation, Samsung Electronics, TSMC, Qualcomm and Micron Technology."}
{"id": "43002", "revid": "830159", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43002", "title": "Curium", "text": "Curium is a synthetic chemical element in the periodic table that has the atomic number 96. It has the chemical symbol Cm and it is a radioactive metal. In chemistry it is placed in a group of metal elements named the actinides. Curium is a transuranic element. It is a radioactive element that does not exist in nature. Curium has a silver color and it is made by bombarding a plutonium target with alpha particles (helium ions). Curium was named after Marie Curie and her husband Pierre.\nUses.\nCurium is used currently in rovers and space machinery. "}
{"id": "43003", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43003", "title": "Lanark", "text": "Lanark is a town in South Lanarkshire, Scotland. It is close to Carluke and Biggar. Lanark is approximately 40 miles from Edinburgh, the capital of Scotland. William Wallace once lived there. There is a statue of Wallace on the town church. A plaque remembers where he \"first drew sword to free his native land\" in 1296, when he killed Heselrig, the English sheriff of Lanark. This event forms the start of the Mel Gibson film, \"Braveheart\". \nLanark is also notable for its annual Lanimer celebrations, where local children on coloured floats parade through the streets along with marching pipe bands. A Lanimer Queen is elected from the children, and crowned in a ceremony at the foot of the High Street. A Lord Cornet is chosen from local businessmen, and acts as escort for the Queen for the events of Lanimer Week."}
{"id": "43004", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43004", "title": "Robert I of Scotland", "text": "Robert I of Scotland (11 July 1274 \u2013 7 June 1329) was King of Scotland from 1306 to 1329. He is better known as Robert the Bruce, or simply The Bruce. He is famous for beating the English army at the Battle of Bannockburn near Stirling in 1314.\nEarly life.\nRobert the Bruce was born at Turnberry Castle on 11 July 1274. He was the oldest son of the sixth Robert Bruce and Marjorie, the Countess of Carrick. \nRobert the Bruce's family originally came from France. They were from a place called Brus in Normandy, which is in the northern part of France. An ancestor also named Robert de Brus came to England with William the Conqueror in 1066. Another Robert de Brus came to Scotland with David I of Scotland and his family became powerful lords.\nIn 1286, King Alexander III of Scotland died. His granddaughter was supposed to become Queen of Scotland, but she died too. In 1292 the Bruce family and another family called the Balliols (BAY-lee-ols) asked King Edward I of England to decide who would become the new king. King Edward chose John Balliol.\nIn 1292 Robert's family decided that he should be the head of all the Bruces in Scotland. In 1297, King Edward I of England wanted Scotland go to war against France. Many Scottish leaders said no and against the English king. Robert joined this rebellion. Edward won most of the battles against the Scottish rebels. Finally Robert ended up doing what Edward wanted.\nKing of Scots.\nIn 1306, Robert the Bruce met a man called John Comyn (KOHM-in) in a church. John Comyn also wanted to be King of Scotland. They had an argument and Robert killed John. Soon after, Robert went to Scone (skoon), and the Scottish lords brought out the royal clothes that they had hidden from the English. Then Robert was crowned King of Scots.\nRobert the Bruce then fought a lot of battles to make Scotland free instead of always doing what the English king wanted. He fought King Edward I, and then his son, King Edward II. In 1314, Robert the Bruce's army defeated Edward II's army at the Battle of Bannockburn.\nIn 1315, Robert the Bruce sent his army to Ireland. At that time the English were in control of Ireland. Robert fought with them and made his brother, Edward Bruce, High King of Ireland in 1316. The Scottish army did not treat the Irish people well, and they were forced to leave after Edward Bruce was killed in 1318.\nLegacy.\nOn June 7th, 1329, Robert the Bruce died. After a life of fighting he had wanted to redeem himself by joining the Crusades. Realizing he could not accomplish this he sent his trusted friend Sir James Douglas to take his heart in a small silver box on crusade. James Douglas took the heart and with several knights left on their journey to honor Robert's request. But in fighting in Spain Sir James was killed and the heart was returned to Scotland. the Bruce's body is buried in Dunfermline Abbey, while his heart is buried in Melrose Abbey.\nRobert did not want any fighting over his kingdom after he died. He provided for his brother Edward Bruce to follow him as king. But after Edward died in 1318 Robert's heir became his son David who became king as David II of Scotland. Following David, Robert's grandson Robert II Stewart by his daughter Marjorie was heir to the throne king as Robert II of Scotland. He left behind him a well-ordered kingdom.\nFamily.\nIn 1295 Robert married Isabella of Mar, daughter of Donald, 6th Earl of Mar. Together they had a daughter:\n&lt;br&gt;\nIn 1302 Robert married his second wife Elizabeth de Burgh. She was the daughter of Richard de Burgh, Earl of Ulster Together they had:\n&lt;br&gt;\nRobert also had several illegitimate children."}
{"id": "43007", "revid": "286637", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43007", "title": "Geelong", "text": "Geelong is the second biggest city in the state of Victoria, Australia. It has a large port and 190,000 people living in its area. Geelong at Corio Bay, which is 75 kilometres south-west \nMelbourne.\nThe city is a near many famous tourist attractions, for example the Great Ocean Road, the Shipwreck Coast and the Bellarine Peninsula. Geelong also has the second oldest Australian rules football club in the world, the Geelong Football Club, also called \"The Cats\"."}
{"id": "43008", "revid": "217550", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43008", "title": "Monty Python's Life of Brian", "text": "Monty Python's Life of Brian is a 1979 comedy movie by Monty Python. It is about the life of Brian Cohen (Graham Chapman), a young man born on the same night and the same neighbourhood as Jesus Christ."}
{"id": "43009", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43009", "title": "Foundry", "text": "A foundry is a place where molten (melted) metals are poured into casts, to make metal things of a certain shape."}
{"id": "43014", "revid": "20265", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43014", "title": "Call of Duty series", "text": "Call Of Duty (short form: \"CoD\") is a first person video game series. There are 24 games in total, not counting add-ons and DLCs. The first 8 games, excluding \"Modern Warfare\", are about World War II. The \"Modern Warfare\" series takes place in present times and was developed by Infinity Ward. \"\" takes place in the secret missions of the Cold War and was developed by Treyarch. The majority of the games were developed by Infinity Ward and Treyarch, with studio Sledgehammer Games developing and . The \"Call of Duty\" games are on the Gamecube, Xbox, PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5 , Xbox 360, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, Xbox Series S, PC, Nintendo Wii, Wii U, and the Nintendo DS. The games are rated Teen or Mature for blood, violence and strong language. \nThe games in the series are: "}
{"id": "43022", "revid": "7264588", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43022", "title": "Elementary particle", "text": "In physics, an elementary particle or fundamental particle is a particle that is not made of other particles.\nAn elementary particle can be one of two groups: a fermion or a boson. Fermions are the building blocks of matter and have mass, while bosons behave as force carriers for fermion interactions and some of them have no mass. The Standard Model is the most accepted way to explain how particles behave, and the forces that affect them. According to this model, the elementary particles are further grouped into quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons, with the Higgs boson having a special status as a non-gauge boson.\nOf the particles that make up an atom, only the electron is an elementary particle. Protons and neutrons are each made of 3 quarks, which makes them composite particles, particles that are made of other particles. The quarks are bound together by the gluons. The nucleus has boson pion fields responsible for the strong nuclear force binding protons and neutrons against the electrostatic repulsion between protons. Such virtual pions are composed of quark antiquark pairs again held together by gluons.\nThere are three basic properties that describe an elementary particle: \u2019mass\u2019, \u2019charge\u2019, and \u2019spin\u2019. Each property is assigned a number value. For mass and charge the number can be zero. For example, a photon has zero mass and a neutrino has zero charge. These properties always stay the same for an elementary particle.\nMass and charge are properties we see in everyday life, because gravity and electricity affect things that humans see and touch. But spin affects only the world of subatomic particles, so it cannot be directly observed.\nFermions.\nFermions (named after the scientist Enrico Fermi) have a spin number of \u00bd, and are either quarks or leptons. There are 12 different types of fermions (not including antimatter). Each type is called a \"flavor\". The flavors are:\nSix of the 12 fermions are thought to last forever: up and down quarks, the electron, and the three kinds of neutrinos (which constantly switch flavor). The other fermions \"decay\". That is, they break down into other particles a fraction of a second after they are created. Fermi-Dirac statistics is a theory that describes how collections of fermions behave.\nBosons.\nBosons, named after the Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, have spin 1. Although most bosons are made of more than one particle, there are two kinds of elementary bosons:\nThe photon and the gluons have no charge, and are the only elementary particles that have a mass of 0 for certain. The photon is the only boson that does not decay. Bose-Einstein statistics is a theory that describes how collections of bosons behave. Unlike fermions, it is possible to have more than one boson in the same space at the same time.\nThe Standard Model includes all of the elementary particles described above. All these particles have been observed in the laboratory.\nThe Standard Model does not talk about gravity. If gravity works like the three other fundamental forces, then gravity is carried by the hypothetical boson called the graviton. The graviton has yet to be found, so it is not included in the table above.\nThe first fermion to be discovered, and the one we know the most about, is the electron. The first boson to be discovered, and also the one we know the most about, is the photon. The theory that most accurately explains how the electron, photon, electromagnetism, and electromagnetic radiation all work together is called quantum electrodynamics."}
{"id": "43025", "revid": "380105", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43025", "title": "Seamonkey", "text": "Seamonkey may mean:"}
{"id": "43027", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43027", "title": "Zatch Bell", "text": ""}
{"id": "43029", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43029", "title": "Spin (physics)", "text": "In physics, spin is the constant rotation of an object. \nFor large visible objects like the Earth, spin is the angular momentum of the turning of the Earth around its axis. This tells the amount of rotation that it has. Angular momentum changes with the mass and shape of the object, and with how fast it is turning.\nSpin in quantum theory.\nExperiments such as the Stern-Gerlach experiment have shown that sub-atomic particles, such as electrons, seem to have a north pole and a south pole much like magnets do. Scientists once thought that this was caused by the particle spinning on its axis like a planet.\nLater, it was shown that the electron would have to be spinning faster than the speed of light to do this. This is why scientists no longer believe that the electron is actually spinning like a planet. Scientists do, however, continue to refer to the magnetic properties of particles as \"spin\".\nSpin, whatever it is, seems to follow some of the laws of angular momentum, but not all of them. A \"spinning\" electron (or any other sub-atomic particle with spin) can only have certain values of angular momentum. Electrons can also align themselves against a magnetic field in ways that would be impossible in the everyday world.\nSpin is considered a fundamental property of any particle. \u00a0"}
{"id": "43031", "revid": "1055405", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43031", "title": "Bendigo, Victoria", "text": "Bendigo is a city in central Victoria, Australia. There are about 86,000 people in Bendigo. It is the fourth biggest city in Victoria after Melbourne, Geelong and Ballarat. The city area is and has the towns Bendigo, Marong, Lockwood, Lockwood South, Ravenswood, Sebastian, Elmore, Heathcote, Maiden Gully, Lake Eppalock, Axedale, Goornong, Raywood and Huntly, all together, there are 100,000 people living there.\nStrathfieldsaye.\nStrathfieldsaye is a small suburb in Bendigo. It takes its name from Stratfield Saye House, which was awarded to the Duke of Wellington after his defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo. In the 2011 census, Strathfieldsaye had a population of 4,648. "}
{"id": "43032", "revid": "7766171", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43032", "title": "Ballarat, Victoria", "text": "Ballarat is a city in central Victoria, Australia. Nearly 90,200 people live there, which makes it the third biggest city in Victoria, after Melbourne and Geelong. It is also the biggest city that is not on the coast in Victoria. It is about north-west of Melbourne. The city area covers about .\nHistory.\nIndigenous Australians.\nTribes of Australian Aboriginals, the Wathaurang and the Borneghurk, used to rest here, and called it \"Balla-arat\" meaning \"Resting - Place\"\nThe first people from Europe came to Ballarat in 1837 to be sheep farmers. They took over large areas of land, with some farms more than . By 1840 there were more than 20 farms with thousands of sheep in the Ballarat area. The city area was a farm owned by William Cross Yuille and Henry Anderson who arrived in 1838. \nGold rush.\nGold was found at Ballarat in late August 1851, by James Regan and John Dunlop and within three weeks there were nearly 1000 people digging in the area looking for gold. In two days the Cavanagh brothers dug up of gold from a hole less than two metres deep. This area is now called \"Golden Point\". Within a year there were 20,000 people living in Ballarat. With so many people coming to look for gold, the town soon became bigger. The Post Office opened on November 1, 1851.\nBallarat is famous as the site for an uprising, or rebellion. This is known as the Eureka Stockade or the Eureka Rebellion, which took place on 3 December 1854. About 30 miners were killed. This is an important moment in Australian history. The site now has a museum, called the Eureka Centre, with displays about the rebellion. The rebel miners flag, the Eureka Flag can be seen at the Ballarat Fine Art Gallery.\nBig city.\nGold mining made Ballarat a rich town, and it was made a city in 1871. The railway came to the town with the opening of the Geelong-Ballarat line in 1862, and a direct line to Melbourne finished in December 1889.\nThe money made from gold mining can still be seen in size of many public buildings, the large parks, wide streets, the grand style of shops and hotels, and large houses built for the wealthy residents. From the 1880s to the start of the 20th century the city changed from a gold rush town to a large industrial city. Factories that made equipment for mining slowly changed into engineering and manufacturing businesses. The Victorian Railways built the Ballarat North Workshops in April 1917.\nDuring 1901, the Duke of Cornwall and York, later King George V, opened the first Commonwealth Parliament in Melbourne. While in Victoria, the Duke and Duchess made several journeys by train, on 13 May they went from Melbourne to Ballarat via Geelong, returning to Melbourne via Bacchus Marsh. Ballarat's airport was opened in 1930.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1940 the Federal Government took over the airport as an air base for the Empire Air Training Scheme. During WWII the base was a RAAF Wireless Air Gunners' School as well as the base for USAAF Liberator bomber squadrons. During the war the airport was made much bigger, with three sealed runways. Two of these were over 2,000 metres (6,550\u00a0ft) long and 45 metres (150\u00a0ft) wide. The aerodrome remained the RAAF School of Radio until 1961 when it was returned to normal use. The City of Ballarat now runs the airport which is listed on the Victorian Heritage Register for its social and historic importance.\nAfter the war.\nAfter World War II, Ballarat grew to the northwest. To ease the housing shortage a large estate was built by the Housing Commission of Victoria on the old Ballarat Common This area is now called Wendouree West. From 1951 to 1962, 750 houses were built, with another 300 added in the 1970s. This was matched by private housing built in Wendouree.\nIn the 1980s the areas of growth have been in the south and west of the city, as well as new building in the inner areas of the city. Through the 20th century Ballarat continued to grow at a steady rate. New public buildings have been built including the hospital, the library, the law courts and the police station complex. Ballarat is home to many schools, including Damascus College."}
{"id": "43036", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43036", "title": "Rosa parks", "text": ""}
{"id": "43037", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43037", "title": "Heimdall", "text": "Heimdall (or Heimdallr) is one of the gods in Northern mythology. He is the guardian of the Bifr\u00f6st Bridge. He was the son of nine different mothers and was called the \"White God\". \nHeimdall is the guardian of the gods. He will blow a horn, called the \"Gjallarhorn\", if Asgard is in danger. His senses are so good that he can hear the grass grow and he can see to the end of the world. Heimdall could hear a leaf fall. He does not need any sleep at all. \nHeimdall was said to be the last of the gods to die at Ragnarok when he and Loki would kill one another."}
{"id": "43038", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43038", "title": "Tantalum", "text": "Tantalum is a chemical element. Tantalum was named tantalium. It has the chemical symbol Ta. It has the atomic number 73. It is a rare metal. It is hard and blue-gray. In chemistry it is placed in a group of metal elements named the transition metals.\nTantalum does not easily corrode. It is found in the mineral tantalite."}
{"id": "43039", "revid": "374981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43039", "title": "Hafnium", "text": "Hafnium is a chemical element. It has the chemical symbol Hf. It has the atomic number 72. It is a metal. It is silver gray. In chemistry it is placed in a group of metal elements named the transition metals. The chemistry of hafnium is similar to zirconium.\nHafnium is found in zirconium minerals. \nHafnium is used in tungsten alloys in filaments and electrodes. It is also used as a neutron absorber in control rods in nuclear power plants."}
{"id": "43040", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43040", "title": "Lutetium", "text": "Lutetium is a chemical element. It has the chemical symbol Lu. It has the atomic number 71. It is a metal and a rare earth element. It is silver white. In chemistry it is placed in a group of metal elements named the transition metals. Lutetium can also be grouped with the lanthanides because it is near the lanthanides in the Periodic Table. Its physical properties are like the lanthanides."}
{"id": "43041", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43041", "title": "Anaheim Ducks", "text": "The Anaheim Ducks are an ice hockey team from Anaheim, California. They are in the National Hockey League (NHL). The Ducks changed the name on June 22, 2006. They used to be the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. The name comes from the Disney movie \"The Mighty Ducks\".\nHistory.\nThe team was created in 1991 and started playing in the 1993 season. The Ducks were originally owned by The Walt Disney Company. In 2005, Disney sold the Ducks to Susan and Henry Samueli\nThey are in the Western Conference's Pacific Division. They play their home games at Honda Center, in Anaheim, California. Their team colors are black, gold, and orange. Dallas Eakins is the team's head coach. Ryan Getzlaf is the captain of the team. \nTo date, they have won one Stanley Cup. It was in the 2006-2007 season. The Anaheim Ducks won the conference championship in the 2002-03 season and 2006-2007 season. They have won 6 Pacific division titles."}
{"id": "43042", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43042", "title": "M\u00f3\u00f0i and Magni", "text": "Magni and M\u00f3\u00f0i\u00a0(Old Norse: \"strength\" and \"bravery\") are a pair of minor deities in Norse mythology. They are sons of the god Thor, said to be embodiments of their father's traits. While Magni is born to Thor by the j\u00f6tunn J\u00e1rnsaxa (a lover of Thor), the name of M\u00f3\u00f0i's mother is unknown. \nOther than his part after Ragnar\u00f6k, little is known about M\u00f3\u00f0i. Magni however, is featured prominently in the myth of Thor's battle with the giant Hrungnir. \nThor hit the giant Hrungnir in the head with his hammer, Mj\u00f6lnir, shattering Hrungnir's skull. The giant then fell dead, as his leg landed on Thor's neck, pinning the god to the ground. The other \u00c6sir tried to lift Hrungnir's leg off of Thor, but were unsuccessful. Thor's son, Magni, who was only three days old at the time, then came to his father and lifted Hrungnir's leg off of Thor all by himself. In his gratitude, Thor gifted his son Hrungnir's horse, Gullfaxi (Old Norse: \"Gold-mane\"). Odin himself was upset that Thor gave the horse to \"the son of a giantess\" and not to Odin, Thor's own father. "}
{"id": "43047", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43047", "title": "Modi and Magni", "text": ""}
{"id": "43048", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43048", "title": "Bifrost Bridge", "text": ""}
{"id": "43049", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43049", "title": "Bifrost", "text": ""}
{"id": "43050", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43050", "title": "AEsir", "text": ""}
{"id": "43051", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43051", "title": "Aesir", "text": ""}
{"id": "43053", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43053", "title": "Kerosene", "text": "Kerosene or paraffin oil is a colourless flammable liquid, usually used for fuel. Kerosene is made by fractional distillation of petroleum. It may be used as fuel for lamps, in some kinds of cooking stoves, and in heaters. Kerosene is mainly used in the fuel for jet engines. The most common consumer use for kerosene in Canada and the US is lighting camp lamps. Kerosene is used as cooking fuel in India. Kerosene is also used for making ketamine"}
{"id": "43055", "revid": "7893600", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43055", "title": "Brass instrument", "text": "A brass instrument is a musical instrument that you play by blowing through a mouthpiece to change the pitch, or note. \nBrass players use their breath to produce sound. Instead of blowing into a reed, they vibrate their lips by buzzing them against a metal cup-shaped mouthpiece. The mouthpiece helps to amplify the buzzing, which creates the sound. Most brass instruments have valves attached to their long pipes; the valves look like buttons. Pressing on the valves makes them open and close different parts of the pipe.\nWith brass instruments, the sound starts at the lips.\nTheir mouthpieces just help your lips buzz. It does not matter if the instrument is really made of brass, as long as it works that way. \nIt is not important what the instrument is made of. Some brass instruments are really made of wood, but are still called brass instruments, like the serpent. Other instruments are made of brass but do not work like this, like the saxophone. They are not called brass instruments, because they don't work that way.\nThere are also parts of the instrument that change the resonance and thus the pitch, like slides or valves.\nA brass band is a group of brass instruments and drums that play music together. They are often used to play for parades and processions because the players can march and play at the same time. Brass bands were very popular in England. Many factories and coal mines had their own bands. The workers would play in the bands after work. One famous band is the Grimethorpe Colliery Band."}
{"id": "43056", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43056", "title": "Crystallization", "text": "Crystallization is the way that atoms link up in a regular structure. The structure is held together by chemical bonds or connected groups. Crystallization can be from a melt or from a solution, and can be natural or artificial. Rarely, crystal can form directly from a gas. Faster crystallization makes smaller size crystals as in basalt, and slower can make bigger crystals, as in granite. \nCrystallization occurs in two major steps. The first is \"nucleation\". This is the appearance of a crystalline phase from a supercooled liquid or a supersaturated solvent. The second step is \"crystal growth\". This is the increase in the size of particles: it leads to a crystal state. Loose particles form layers at the crystal's surface and lodge themselves into open pores, cracks, etc.\nArtificial crystallization is a technique to get solid crystals from a homogeneous solution. For crystallization to occur the solution should be supersaturated. Put simply, the solution should contain more solute molecules than it would under ordinary conditions. This can be achieved by various methods\u2014solvent evaporation, cooling, and chemical reaction.\nTo make things clear we can use a simple example. We take a bowl of water to which we add sugar crystals. We keep adding sugar to it until we reach a stage when no more crystals can be dissolved. This solution is now a saturated one. It is interesting to note that we can dissolve more crystals to this particular saturated solution by heating it. Solubility of solutes increases with increase in temperature, but there are exceptional cases. This increase in temperature causes more sugar crystals to dissolve (so forming a supersaturated solution), but when the temperature of the solution cools down, the solubility of the solute decreases This is because the temperature of the solution has decreased, and the 'excess' sugar crystallizes out. This process illustrates the simplest of supersaturation techniques. \n'Drowning' is the addition of a nonsolvent in the solution that decreases the solubility of the solid. Alternatively, chemical reactions can also be used to decrease the solubility of the solid in the solvent, thus working towards supersaturation.\nCrystallization can be divided into stages primary nucleation is the first. It is the growth of a new crystal. In turn this causes secondary nucleation \u2013 the final stage if removal of the crystals is not an issue. Secondary nucleation needs existing crystals to continue crystal growth. In our sugar example, we had got such nuclei when the 'excess' sugar had just about crystallized out. Secondary nucleation is the main stage in crystallization for this is what causes the 'mass production' of crystals."}
{"id": "43058", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43058", "title": "Pearl Harbour Incident", "text": ""}
{"id": "43059", "revid": "5387016", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43059", "title": "Stir frying", "text": "Stir frying is a when food is cooked in a Wok (a traditional Asian pan for cooking). This method usually makes food cook faster."}
{"id": "43061", "revid": "4056", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43061", "title": "Iridium (element)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43070", "revid": "287723", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43070", "title": "Ragnarok Online", "text": "Ragnarok Online is an online computer game. It was made by Gravity Corp. It is a Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game. The game was first released in 2002."}
{"id": "43071", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43071", "title": "Cairns, Queensland", "text": "Cairns is a city in Queensland, Australia. 120.000 people live there. Cairns is about 1720 km (1,069 miles) north of Brisbane and about 2500km (1,553 miles) from Sydney by road. It is built on the shores of Trinity Bay.\nCairns is an important travel destination for tourists because it is warm all year round and is near many attractions. The Great Barrier Reef is only one-and-a-half hours away by boat. The Daintree National Park and Cape Tribulation, about 130km north of Cairns, are popular areas for experiencing a tropical rainforest. It is also a starting point for people wanting to see Cooktown, Cape York Peninsula, and the Atherton Tableland.\nHistory.\nCaptain James Cook named Trinity Bay when he arrived there in his ship HM Bark Endeavour on Trinity Sunday, 1770. The first Europeans to settle arrived in 1876 when gold was found near Cairns. It was named after the Governor of Queensland, Sir William Cairns."}
{"id": "43073", "revid": "1060941", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43073", "title": "Arabian Sea", "text": "The Arabian Sea is the northwest part of the Indian ocean. To its west are the Guardafui Channel, Somali Sea and Arabian peninsula. To its east is the Indian peninsula. It covers around . The Arabian Sea one of the warmest seas.\nLimits.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Arabian Sea as follows:\nBorder and Basin countries.\nThe countries into which the Arabian Sea drains include: \nOther names.\nOther names for the sea include:\nThe Arabian Sea, historically and geographically, has been referred to by different names by Turks, Persians, Arabs, and scholars of Geography and cartography in medieval Islam, European geographers and travelers, including the Ministry of Iran.\nIn Indian folklore, it is referred to as Darya, Sindhu Sagar, and Arab Samudra.\nArab sailors and nomads used to call this sea by different names, including the green sea, Bahre Fars, the ocean sea, the Hindu sea, the Makran Sea, the sea of Oman, among them the Zakariya al-Qazwini, Al-Masudi , Ibn Hawqal and (Hafiz-i Abru) They wrote: \u201cThe green sea and Indian sea and Persian sea are all one sea and in this sea there are strange creatures. Ibn Khordadbeh, Ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi, Muhammad al-Idrisi, Istakhri, Mahmud al-Kashgari, Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad, and Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi had mentioned the sea as Persian sea and Bahr e Fars.\nSome medieval maps, including the map by Vincenzo Maria, Coronelli, 1693 had mentioned the Persian sea and also Macran. Cornelius Le Brun's Year 1718 Map. On this map, the name of the Oman Sea is recorded as \"Gulf of Hormuz\". Map of Iran in the 16th century by Abraham Ortelius in which the name of the Persian Sea and the Indian Sea appear. Iran, had in the past, been called persian sea, but now like Turkey, it is called Oman sea together with the gulf of Oman Encyclop\u00e6dia Iranica also call it Oman sea.\nMaps with historical names.\nMany atlases had published old maps of Asia and Indian ocean such as Atlas of The Arabian Peninsula in Old European Maps.Paris, 424pp. contains 253 maps.10 maps have used persian Sea (for the body of water which is now called Arabian sea)the maps in pages: -141-226-323-322-331-345-347-363-355\u2022 such as the hours shape map of Bunting H.S.Q34/24CM Hanover,1620."}
{"id": "43075", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43075", "title": "Base (chemistry)", "text": "A base is a substance that can accept a hydrogen ion (H+) from another substance. A chemical can accept a proton if it has a negative charge, or if the molecule has an electronegative atom like oxygen, nitrogen, or chlorine that is rich in electrons. Like acids, some bases are strong and others are weak. The weak bases are less likely to accept protons, while the strong bases quickly take protons in solution or from other molecules.\nAn acid is a base's \"chemical opposite\". An acid is a substance that will donate a hydrogen atom to the base. \nBases have a pH greater than 7.0. Weak bases generally have a pH value of 79 while strong bases have a pH value of 9\u201314. \nHow bases work.\nBases can be used to neutralize acids. When a base, often OH\u2013, accepts a proton from an acid, it forms a water molecule which is harmless. When all of the acids and bases react to form water molecules and other neutral salts, it is called neutralization. Acids can also be used to neutralize bases. \nEvery base has a conjugate acid formed by adding a hydrogen atom to the base. For example, NH3 (ammonia) is a base and its conjugate acid is the ammonium ion, NH4+. A weak base forms a strong conjugate acid and a strong base forms a weaker conjugate acid. Since ammonia is a moderately strong base, ammonium is a considerably weaker acid.\nCharacteristics.\nBases have these characteristics:\nSome common household products are bases. For example, caustic soda and drain cleaner are made from sodium hydroxide, a strong base. Ammonia or an ammonia-based cleaner such as window and glass cleaner, is basic. These stronger bases may cause a skin irritation. Other bases, like cooking ingredients sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) or cream of tartar are basic, but these are not harmful and suitable for cooking. \nGloves should always be worn when handling bases. If skin irritation is encountered, the affected area should be rinsed thoroughly with cold water. If that does not stop the problem, contact medical help as soon as possible.\nStrong bases.\nA strong base is a base that gives off a hydroxide ion, OH\u2013, when put in water. There are eight of them."}
{"id": "43076", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43076", "title": "Ytterbium", "text": "Ytterbium is a chemical element. It has the chemical symbol Yb. It has the atomic number 70. It is part of a group of chemical elements in the periodic table named the Lanthanides. Ytterbium is a rare earth element. It is soft and silver in colour.\nYtterbium is found in minerals named gadolinite, monazite, and xenotime. In nature it is found as a mix of seven stable isotopes. Ytterbium is used in some steels and is also used to make lasers. "}
{"id": "43079", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43079", "title": "Ununtrium", "text": ""}
{"id": "43081", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43081", "title": "Heart transplant", "text": "A heart transplant is a type of surgery where someone's heart is removed and another one is put in because theirs is not working properly. The new heart is taken from a dead person who does not need it any more. The first heart transplant on a human was done by Christiaan Barnard in December 1967."}
{"id": "43085", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43085", "title": "Joan Baez", "text": "Joan Chandos Baez (born January 9, 1941) is an American folk singer and activist. Baez is known for her very individual vocal style. She is a soprano with a three-octave vocal range. Many of her songs talk about social issues.\nShe is best known for her 1970s hits \"Diamonds &amp; Rust\" and \"The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down\". She is also known for \"Sweet Sir Galahad\" and \"Joe Hill.\" She sang these songs at the 1969 Woodstock festival and the songs became famous. She is also well known due to her relationship with Bob Dylan and her love for activism in areas such as nonviolence, civil and human rights and the environment.\nMusic.\nBaez has performed for nearly fifty years. She has released over thirty albums. She has recorded songs in over eight languages. Baez is considered a folksinger, but after the 1960s her music became a lot different from folk. She sings many kinds of music, including rock, pop, country, and gospel. Baez is famous for singing other peoples' songs very differently. She sang songs by The Beatles, Jackson Browne, Paul Simon, The Rolling Stones, Stevie Wonder and many others.\nActivism.\nBaez protests against social and environmental problems. She did not support the Vietnam War. She did not want people to pay taxes that paid for the Vietnam War. Baez did not want men going to fight in the war. She did not perform in places where people of color were treated differently. In addition, Baez helped found the Resource Center for Nonviolence. The Resource Center for Nonviolence is an organization whose goal is to make social change without violence."}
{"id": "43086", "revid": "7806538", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43086", "title": "Kalmar Union", "text": "The Kalmar Union was a historical consisting union of the kingdoms of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, and various other provinces and areas. At that time, Norway included Iceland, Greenland, the Faroe Islands, Shetland, Orkney, and parts of Finland belonged to Sweden. The union was started in 1397 at a meeting in the town of Kalmar in Sweden. The union ended on 6 June 1523 when Sweden left the union by Gustav I."}
{"id": "43088", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43088", "title": "Tomorrow Never Knows (Mr. Children song)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43089", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43089", "title": "Francisco Goya", "text": ""}
{"id": "43099", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43099", "title": "Bay of Plenty", "text": "The Bay of Plenty is a region in New Zealand. It was first called the Bay of Plenty by Captain James Cook in November 1769. The M\u0101ori name for the bay is \"Te\u00a0Moana-a-Toi\" (\"the sea of Toi\")."}
{"id": "43101", "revid": "5376652", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43101", "title": "Plotter", "text": "A plotter is a kind of printer for computers. Plotters use vector graphics. Usually they are used to print to paper which is very large in size. Plotters print things using special, colored pens. There is one called the drum plotter. They are often used in warehouses. They are generally used for making flex or maps."}
{"id": "43102", "revid": "7380336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43102", "title": "Dot matrix printing", "text": "Dot-matrix printers are printers for computers. A dot matrix printer creates characters by striking pins against ink ribbons. The print head moves back and forth on the paper like a typewriter and prints the image Each pin makes a dot, and combinations of dots form characters and pictures. This is much like a typewriter. Each character is made from a matrix of dots. These were used a lot in the 1970s to the 1990s. Today, dot matrix printers are not used by many people anymore. Most people use inkjet printers or laser printers now. They are still in use where forms (with multiple copies) need to be filled out. It is not advisable for office uses as it is an impact printer (make noise as the job is getting done). It prints information on a stationery paper "}
{"id": "43105", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43105", "title": "Vercingetorix", "text": "Vercingetorix ( in Gaulish) born c.82 BC, died 46 BC. was a chieftain of the Gallic tribe of the Arverni. \nHe led the Gauls in 52 BC against the Roman army in Gaul led by Julius Caesar. Vercingetorix's name in Gaulish means \"over-king of the marching men\"; the \"marching men\" would now be called \"infantry\".\nVercingetorix was probably one of the first to unite some tribes of Gaul against a common enemy. This was the last major uprising of the peoples of Gaul against the Roman invaders.\nAfter the celebration of Caesar's triumph was over, Vercingetorix was executed."}
{"id": "43106", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43106", "title": "Philippe Noiret", "text": "Philippe Noiret (1 October 1930, in Lille, France \u2013 23 November 2006 in Paris) was a well-known French actor. He is probably best known for his role in Cinema Paradiso, and for playing Pablo Neruda in the film Il Postino. He died on November 23, 2006 of cancer.\nSelected works.\nFilm"}
{"id": "43108", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43108", "title": "Eva Peron", "text": ""}
{"id": "43112", "revid": "1051124", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43112", "title": "Monica Bellucci", "text": "Monica Bellucci (born on 30 September 1964 is an Italian actress. She was born in Citt\u00e0 di Castello, Umbria. Bellucci started modelling at 16. She is the daughter of Maria Gustinelli, a painter, and Luigi Bellucci, who owned a trucking company. She used to be a fashion model. She speaks Italian, French, and English fluently and has acted in each of these languages, as well as Aramaic. She is currently considered as an Italian sex symbol. Bellucci is married to Vincent Cassel and has a daughter named Deva (born 12 September 2004). In 2004, while pregnant with her daughter, Bellucci posed nude for the Italian \"Vanity Fair\" Magazine in protest against Italian laws that allow only married couples to use in-vitro fertilization and that prevent the use of donor sperm."}
{"id": "43118", "revid": "6528", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43118", "title": "Simpsons", "text": ""}
{"id": "43119", "revid": "6528", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43119", "title": "800 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "43123", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43123", "title": "Play (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43127", "revid": "6522", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43127", "title": "Heart transplantation", "text": ""}
{"id": "43128", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43128", "title": "Aik", "text": ""}
{"id": "43129", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43129", "title": "Murrayfield Stadium", "text": "Murrayfield Stadium in Edinburgh is the home of the Scottish national rugby team. It was first built in 1925. In 1995, the stadium was renovated. It has seats for 67,144 people. It held the record for the most people at a rugby union match. 104,000 people watched Scotland play Wales in 1975."}
{"id": "43130", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43130", "title": "List of football clubs in Sweden", "text": "This is a list of football clubs in Sweden.\nAlphabetically.\n\u00c5 \u00c4 \u00d6"}
{"id": "43131", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43131", "title": "Allm\u00e4nna Idrottsklubben", "text": "AIK (which stands for Allm\u00e4nna Idrottsklubben), is a sports club from Sweden. It is one of the biggest and one of the oldest in the country. It was founded in 1891. The name means \"Common\" (or \"Public\") \"Sports Club\". It has departments for many different sports including football, ice hockey, bandy, golf, table tennis, bowling, and handball."}
{"id": "43132", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43132", "title": "Neighbor", "text": ""}
{"id": "43133", "revid": "526512", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43133", "title": "Network Ten", "text": "Network Ten is one of three major television networks in Australia. It started broadcasting television in 1965, when they were called Independent Television Network.\nShows.\nShows that Network Ten buy from other countries and broadcast in Australia include:\nShows made in Australia for Network Ten include:"}
{"id": "43135", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43135", "title": "Seven Network", "text": "Seven Network is one of three major television networks in Australia. It started broadcasting in 1956. In recent years, it has grown into a diversified media company. Seven Network's main shareholder is Kerry Stokes.\nSeven Network's studio headquarters are in a converted warehouse at Jones Bay Wharf in Pyrmont, Sydney. Its headquarters for its news department are in Martin Place, Sydney. Seven's major production facilities are at Epping in Sydney's northern suburbs. Seven Network are planning to move their production facilities to a specially built site at the Australian Technology Park in Redfern.\nOther websites.\nhttp://seven.com.au/Seven"}
{"id": "43136", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43136", "title": "Accounting", "text": "Accounting or accountancy is the job of sharing financial information about a business to managers and shareholders (people who have invested in the business). Accounting is often called the \"language of business\". Accountants are people who do accounting, and also carry out the auditing or checking of a company's books and records. In Britain, this auditing is often carried out by a qualified person called a \"chartered accountant\". In the United States, the professional designation is Certified Public Accountant or \"CPA\". \nWhen accountants do accounting work, they write in the books of account (ledgers) that belong to a company. Every time money is spent or earned, it is written in the ledger. The information in the ledger is used to prepare the company accounts monthly, quarterly (every three months) and annually (every year). These annual accounts show what money the company has taken in over time and what it has spent money on. It also shows if the company made a profit in the year (if it made more money than it spent), who owes the company money, who the company owes money to, and any big expensive items the company has bought which they expect to use for many years. Lenders, managers, investors, tax authorities (the people who collect taxes for the government) and other decision-makers look at these annual accounts. Managers and investors look at the ledger and make decisions about how to spend money in the future. Lenders like banks look at the accounts before they lend money to the company. Tax authorities look at them to check that the company is paying the correct amount of taxes.\nWhere the word comes from.\nThe word \"accountant\" originally comes from the Latin word \"computare\" \u2013 \"to reckon, count, number\", via French.\n\"Accomptant\" was the original spelling and pronunciation of the word \"accountant\". However, over time, people began to drop the \"p\" in the word \"accomptant\". Over time, the word changed both in the way it was said and spelled to how it is today.\nAccounting theory.\nThe basic accounting equation is assets=liabilities+equity.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAccountancy is very old. It started when humans first started to farm and form towns and cities. People who thought about economics (keeping track of money and valuable things) thought of a way to write down the sizes and values of crops.\nToken accounting in ancient Mesopotamia.\nThe earliest accounting records were found among the ruins of ancient Babylon, Assyria and Sumeria, which are more than 7,000 years old. The people of that time relied on primitive accounting methods to record the growth of crops and herds. Because there is a natural season for farming and herding, it is easy to count and determine if a surplus had been gained after the crops had been harvested or the young animals weaned.\nThe invention of a form of bookkeeping using clay tokens represented a huge cognitive leap for mankind.\nIn the twelfth-century A.D., the Arab writer, Ibn Taymiyyah, wrote a book called \"Hisba\". This book has details about accounting systems that were used by Muslims before the mid-seventh century A.D. Muslim accounting was influenced (changed) by Romans and Persians. In his book, Ibn Taymiyyah gives details of a complex governmental accounting system.\nAccounting in the Roman Empire.\nThe \"Res Gestae Divi Augusti\" (Latin: \"The Deeds of the Divine Augustus\") is a remarkable account to the Roman people of the Emperor Augustus' stewardship. It listed and quantified his public expenditure, which encompassed distributions to the people, grants of land or money to army veterans, subsidies to the \"aerarium\" (treasury), building of temples, religious offerings, and expenditures on theatrical shows and gladiatorial games. It was not an account of state revenue and expenditure, but was designed to demonstrate Augustus' munificence. The significance of the \"Res Gestae Divi Augusti\" from an accounting perspective lies in the fact that it illustrates that the executive authority had access to detailed financial information, covering a period of some forty years, which was still retrievable after the event. The scope of the accounting information at the emperor's disposal suggests that its purpose encompassed planning and decision-making.\nThe Roman historians Suetonius and Cassius Dio record that in 23 BC, Augustus prepared a \"rationarium\" (account) which listed public revenues, the amounts of cash in the \"aerarium\" (treasury), in the provincial \"fisci\" (tax officials), and in the hands of the \"publicani\" (public contractors); and that it included the names of the freedmen and slaves from whom a detailed account could be obtained. The closeness of this information to the executive authority of the emperor is attested by Tacitus' statement that it was written out by Augustus himself. \nRecords of cash, commodities, and transactions were kept scrupulously by military personnel of the Roman army. An account of small cash sums received over a few days at the fort of Vindolanda circa 110 CE shows that the fort could compute revenues in cash on a daily basis, perhaps from sales of surplus supplies or goods manufactured in the camp, items dispensed to slaves such as \"cervesa\" (beer) and \"clavi caligares\" (nails for boots), as well as commodities bought by individual soldiers. The basic needs of the fort were met by a mixture of direct production, purchase and requisition; in one letter, a request for money to buy 5,000 \"modii\" (measures) of \"braces\" (a cereal used in brewing) shows that the fort bought provisions for a considerable number of people.\nThe Heroninos Archive is the name given to a huge collection of papyrus documents, mostly letters, but also including a fair number of accounts, which come from Roman Egypt in 3rd century CE. The bulk of the documents relate to the running of a large, private estate is named after Heroninos because he was \"phrontistes\" (Koine Greek: manager) of the estate which had a complex and standarised system of accounting which was followed by all its local farm managers. Each administrator on each sub-division of the estate drew up his own little accounts, for the day-to-day running of the estate, payment of the workforce, production of crops, the sale of produce, the use of animals, and general expenditure on the staff. This information was then summarized as pieces of papyrus scroll into one big yearly account for each particular sub\u2014division of the estate. Entries were arranged by sector, with cash expenses and gains extrapolated from all the different sectors. Accounts of this kind gave the owner the opportunity to take better economic decisions because the information was purposefully selected and arranged.\nLuca Pacioli and modern accountancy.\nLuca Pacioli (1445\u20131517), also known as Friar Luca dal Borgo, is said to be the \"Father\" of accountancy. He wrote a textbook in Latin called \"Summa de arithmetica, geometrica, proportioni et proportionalita\" (\"Summa on arithmetic, geometry, proportions and proportionality\", Venice 1494). This textbook was used in the abbaco schools in northern Italy. Sons of merchants and craftsmen were taught in these schools. This textbook was written about math. It has the first printed description of how merchants from Venice kept their accounts. Merchants from Venice used a system called the double-entry bookkeeping system.\nDouble-entry bookkeeping is where there is a debit and credit entry for every transaction.\nPacioli wrote down this system but he did not invent it, but he is still called the \"Father of Accounting\". The system he wrote had most of the accounting cycle as it is known today. He wrote about using journals and ledgers, and warned that a person should not go to sleep at night until the debits were the same as the credits. His ledger had accounts for assets (things that have value), liabilities (debts and loans that are to be paid to someone else), capital (money), income and expenses. He showed how to write year-end closing entries and suggested that a trial balance be used to prove that a ledger is balanced. His treatise (long essay) in the book also has info about other topics, such as accounting ethics and cost accounting.\nPost-Pacioli.\nThe first book written in the English language on accounting was published in London, England by John Gouge in 1543.\nIn 1588 John Mellis from Southwark, England wrote a short book of instructions for keeping accounts.\nThere was another book written in 1635 that was described as \"The Merchants Mirrour, or directions for the perfect ordering and keeping of his accounts formed by way of Debitor and Creditor\". This book was written by Richard Dafforne, who was an accountant. This book has many references to books about accountancy that were written much earlier. One chapter of this book is titled \"Opinion of Book-keeping's Antiquity\". In this chapter the author says that, according to another author, the bookkeeping he wrote about was used two-hundred years earlier in Venice.\nThere were several editions of Richard Dafforne's book. The second edition was published in 1636. The third edition was published in 1656. Another edition was published in 1684. The book is very complete in how it describes scientific accountancy. It contains a lot of detail and explanation. The science that supports accountancy was liked by many people in the seventeenth century. This is supported by the fact that there were so many editions. Starting at this point in history, there have been many books written about accountancy. Many authors claim to be professional accountants and teachers of accountancy. Because of this, it shows that there were professional accountants who were employed in the seventeenth century.\nTypes of accounting.\nA financial audit is where an internal audit and an external audit are done. For an external audit, an independent (unrelated) auditor takes a look at financial statements and accounting records. By looking at these records, the auditor can find out if these records are true, fair and follow Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), or International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). \"Internal audit\" tries to get info for management usage, and is done by employees."}
{"id": "43138", "revid": "7759184", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43138", "title": "Des Lynam", "text": "Desmond Michael Lynam (17 September 1942 \u2013 11 April 2021) was an British television and radio presenter. He was born in Ennis, County Clare, Republic of Ireland. He was best known for presenting the BBC's sport coverage such as \"Grandstand\".\nLynam also presented \"Countdown\" on Channel 4 from 2005-2006. He was replaced by Des O'Connor.\nDes Lynam died on 11 April 2021, at the age of 78."}
{"id": "43139", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43139", "title": "Carbonate", "text": "A carbonate is a chemical compound that has the carbonate ion, . This ion is made of carbon and oxygen. The name may also mean an ester of carbonic acid, an organic compound containing the carbonate group C(=O)(O\u2013)2 of carbon and oxygen. They have a valency of 1.\nWhen added to an acid, a carbonate will produce carbon dioxide, water and a chemical salt. Sedimentary rocks containing calcite and other carbonates are plentiful in the earth."}
{"id": "43145", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43145", "title": "Mercali intensity scale", "text": ""}
{"id": "43146", "revid": "1060202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43146", "title": "Antonie van Leeuwenhoek", "text": "Antonie Philips van Leeuwenhoek (24 October 1632 \u2013 30 August 1723; last name pronounced 'Layvenhook') was a Dutch tradesman and scientist from Delft, Netherlands. He is best known for his work to improve the microscope.\nUsing his handcrafted microscopes, he was the first to see and describe single celled organisms, which he originally referred to as \"animalcules\", and which we now refer to as microorganisms. He was also the first to record microscopic observations of muscle fibers, bacteria, spermatozoa and blood flow in small blood vessels. Van Leeuwenhoek did not write books, but sent letters to the Royal Society in London. The letters were published in the Royal Society's journal \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\".\nIn his youth van Leeuwenhoek was apprenticed to a draper. Later, a civil service position allowed him to give time to his hobby: grinding lenses and using them to study tiny objects. His simple microscopes were skillfully ground, powerful single lenses capable of high image quality. He looked at protozoa in rainwater, pond water and well water. He also looked at bacteria in the human mouth and intestine. In 1677, he first described the spermatozoa of insects, dogs, and humans.\nHis observations laid the foundations for the sciences of bacteriology and protozoology. He was the first to see bacteria, protists, spermatozoa, the cell vacuole, blood corpuscles, capillaries, and the structure of muscles and nerves."}
{"id": "43147", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43147", "title": "Anton van leeuwenhoek", "text": ""}
{"id": "43148", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43148", "title": "Thonius Philips van Leeuwenhoek", "text": ""}
{"id": "43152", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43152", "title": "AIK", "text": ""}
{"id": "43153", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43153", "title": "Barbie", "text": "Barbie is a fashion doll best known as a toy doll. Starting as just a doll, Barbie became a brand. It is most common in the United States. It is named after a girl named Barbara, who was the toy maker's daughter. Though the brand is most famous for the doll, other merchandise has been created with the Barbie name such as games, movies, videos, clothing, accessories, and books. The clothes and fashion accessories allow girls a taste of high fashion. \nThroughout the decades, Barbie has reflected and encouraged feminine growth in the workplace in the United States. She has been a miniature model of women worldwide. The doll has been criticized for causing self-image complexes, yet other companies continue to produce similar dolls. \"The Barbie doll is the biggest selling toy in the history of proprietary toy manufacturing.\" On average, 172,000 dolls are sold by Mattel each day.\nOrigin.\nRuth Handler was the creator of Barbie. Her parents were Polish Jewish immigrants. She was the tenth child. Her husband, Elliot Handler was the founder of Mattel in 1945, which is the largest toy company in the world. She originally wanted to name the doll \"Barbara\", after her daughter, or \"Babs\" after her daughter's nickname. However, both those names were copyrighted.\nLate 1950s.\nBarbie was first released on March 9, 1959 at a toy fair in New York after seven years of battling disagreements. At the time, Mattel was the third largest toy company in the United States. Ruth's display of Barbie was housed at the New Yorker Hotel in a hotel room, since so many businesses brought their toys to put on display. She had to halt the projected production that she assumed she would acquire in business orders at the fair. It was a disappointing day for Ruth and Barbie. In March 1959, Barbie debuted as a teen fashion model on television with more positive response leading the way for the dolls popularity rise.\nA blonde Barbie from this decade in mint condition has an appraisal price listing of five thousand-$5,250. The brunette Barbie that was made at the same time is worth $1,000 more than the blonde.\nThe 1960s.\nIn the 1960s Barbie's friends joined the line up of fashion dolls. Ken was her boyfriend and came to be in 1962. The Ken doll got his name from Ruth's son. Midge was her friend who was a redhead meeting the toy marketplace in 1963, a year after Ken. Allen was Ken's friend. Skipper was her little sister that was produced in 1964. Tutti and Todd were her twin siblings were introduced in 1966. Francie was her adult cousin. In 1967, Francie was changed into the first black Barbie doll causing consumers to believe it reflected the support of interracial marriages. Since this was during Civil Rights' time, she was not very successful. Twelve months later Mattel introduced Christie, the second black Barbie, who was much more accepted. Cara and Julia were also produced as Barbie's black friends. The roles of Barbie evolved as equality for women's rights progressed. The doll started in the 1960s portraying stereotypical female positions like teacher, stewardess, nurse, etc. A series of novels were also written introducing Barbie and her birthplace in the 60's. Bendable legs and swivel hips were introduced on Barbie in 1965. Jack Ryan created them.\nHairstyles of the Barbie's in the 1960s were typically the classic bubble-cut hairstyle of the era taken from the First Lady of the early 60's Jackie Kennedy. The Barbie that is worth the most from this decade according to \"Schroeder's Collectible Toys\" is Color Magic Barbie made in 1967. Her hair and costume changes color. If it is complete with its cardboard box, it is worth $4,000.\nThe 1970's.\nChildren could purchase the new bendable Barbie's at a discounted rate if they wanted to trade in the old style in the 1970s. Christie's black boyfriend, Brad was introduced in 1970.\nBarbie's facial features were changed in 1971 from eyes cutting from the side and smile without teeth to eyes forward and a wide smile exposing teeth. This change occurred to keep current with the times representing a \"forward-thinking peace-and-love generation.\"\nThe first doctor Barbie appeared in 1973. Cara's boyfriend Brad reached the toy market in 1975. The flip hairstyle was a popular way for Barbie's hair to be styled in the 70's. The Sears' exclusive Dramatic New Living Skipper Very Best Velvet Barbie made in 1970-71 has the highest list price for the decade in \"Schroeder's Collectible Toys\" at $1,500.00.\nThe 1980's.\nHispanic and black Barbies were no longer featured as friends of Barbie's in the 1980s. They had reached the Barbie title in their own right. Magic Curl Barbie made its debut in 1982 feauting both black and white races. The first Asian doll produced representing Hong Kong in 1981 came from a mold with a rounder face and almond shaped eyes. A Japanese Barbie hit the market in 1985 as one of the first other nationalities offered with the collection of International Dolls of the World Barbies following its release. Barbie was made into a pilot in 1989. The doll could be viewed as opening the door for female acceptance in otherwise male dominant careers paving the way with astronaut Barbie debuting eighteen years prior to Sally Ride's first female in space endeavor. The 1980s also began the Holiday Barbie collection. The first one was produced in 1988 and its listed value is $325, which is $700 less than what it was worth in the 1990s.\nThe 1990's.\nShani, Asha, and Nichelle were produced to offer greater skin tone and facial feature selection to represent blacks more accurately in 1991.A hit single produced by the band Aqua entitled \"Barbie Girl\" climbed charts worldwide in 1997. Also in 1997, Puerto Rican Barbie debuted. Barbie's body measurements changed in 1998 due to consumer demand. Her breasts and hips were reduced and waist was widened. Race car driving NASCAR Barbie hit toy store shelves in 1998 and 1999 foreshadowing the first female race car driver Danica Patrick. Barbie was flashy and wore bright colors in the 90's. 1994's Barbie Snow Princess worth $1100 is the highest listed of the decade in \"Schroeder's Collectible Toys\".\nThe New Millennium.\nRuth had died, and could not dip Barbie's hand and footprints in her concrete slab on Hollywood Boulevard in 2002. Instead, Barbara, her daughter for whom the doll was named, did the honors inducting the doll to superstar status. In 2006 a movie, \"The Tribe\" used Barbie to connect with being Jewish in America. In 2008, Barbie was transformed into a representation of African culture for the hundredth anniversary of the first African American sorority Alpha Kappa Alpha. 2009 brought about changes to the black Barbie adding fuller lips and altered facial features at the request of consumer complaints. Tricelle was given more textured and curlier hair. Chataine Barbie made in 2003 is worth $425 according to \"Schroeder's\".\nSelf Image.\nSome people believe Barbie gives girls a wrong idea of what they will look like when they grow up. They think the introduction of the doll was wrong because it made young girls believe they had to become skinny in order to be just like Barbie. As in earlier dolls, her head is disproportionately large. Unlike those, her breasts are large and her waist and feet are disproportionately small;. If her doll size proportions were converted into life size body measurements (breast size, waist size, hip size) only 1 in 100,000 women would match them, at least without plastic surgery. Someone shaped like Barbie would suffer back problems due to her breast size. She would be unable to support her weight on her tiny feet and could not walk. \nThe doll has been blamed for eating disorders, such as anorexia and bulimia. She is not supposed to be taken as a literal interpretation of a teenage girl. Barbie was not built to give girls an inferior complex when comparing themselves to the doll. She was built to be a longer lasting alternative to the easily torn paper dolls for hours of enjoyment reinacting life scenes through a child's creativity and imagination. Barbie is a teen doll, which gives little girls a peek at what might happen in their teen life. This was thought to be bad, because Barbie has lots of boyfriends. \nBarbie rivals.\nRuth Handler, Barbie's creator, has been blamed for taking the Barbie doll design from a doll made in Germany in 1955, the Lilli doll that was sold mainly at tobacco shops, for men. Lilli was originally a cartoon character in a tabloid newspaper in Germany created by Reinhard Beuthein in 1952. O.M. Hausser/Elastolin Company had Max Weissbrodt, a doll maker of theirs get a patent for Lilli's limb design. Ruth is rumored to have purchased a few of the dolls while in Switzerland with her family. \nThe Barbie doll has been in competition with other toy companies' doll designs. Ideal Toy and Novelty Company began making Tammy in 1962, American Character Doll Company challenged Barbie's sales in 1963 with Tressy, and Remco started producing the Littlechap Family in 1964. However, none had the popularity of Barbie. At the time of production, Tammy gave Barbie creators a financial scare. She was based on a movie character played by Debbie Reynolds. Instead of being surrounded with friends and boyfriends, the doll came with a mother and father, which might be why her popularity never surpassed Barbie's.\nBarbie spin-offs.\nBarbie is a very big trend. She has had many sisters, boyfriends, and friends. She has \"dream houses\" and clothes. She has many jobs from teacher to doctor to astronaut. There have been many other dolls like Barbie since Barbie was first produced. Barbie also created MyScene dolls, a spoof of Bratz. The fact is the creator of Barbie, Ruth Handler, fought sexism and overcame her domesticated gender role to accomplish her goals in the business arena as a female by producing the world famous Barbie doll."}
{"id": "43158", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43158", "title": "Parmesan cheese", "text": "Parmesan cheese is the name of an Italian extra-hard cheese made of raw cow's milk. The original Parmesan cheese is more precisely called \"Parmigiano-Reggiano\". It is produced only in Italy, in the provinces of Parma, Reggio Emilia, Modena, Mantua (partly) and Bologna (partly). It is usually the cheese to go with Spaghetti and other typical Italian pasta, but it also has many other uses. Parmesan is a part of Italian national cuisine and it can be eaten both grated and in slivers. It is hard, sharp and dry.\nParmigiano-Reggiano is DOP / AOC. This means that the way they are made and the region in Italy they come from are strictly controlled.\nThe brand (Parmigiano Reggiano) is protected, and only in Europe. In many parts of the world, cheese is sold as \"Parmesan cheese\" that has nothing to do with the true (Italian) Parmigiano Reggiano.\nThe original Parmesan cheese is one of the most expensive cheeses in the world.\nName.\nWithin the European Union, the term \"Parmesan\" may only be used, by law, to refer to Parmigiano-Reggiano itself, which must be made in a restricted geographic area, using stringently defined methods. In many areas outside Europe, the name \"Parmesan\" has become genericized: Any one of a number of hard Italian-style grating cheeses are called 'Patmesan'. After the European ruling that \"parmesan\" could not be used as a generic name, Kraft renamed its grated cheese \"Pamesello\" in Europe.\nOne kind of cheese, which is very similar, but produced in another region in Italy, is Grana Padano. Grana Padano is produced in Lombardy, "}
{"id": "43159", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43159", "title": "Franz Liszt", "text": "Franz Liszt (born Raiding, nr. Sopron, October 22, 1811; died Bayreuth, July 31, 1886) was a Hungarian composer and pianist. Liszt (pronounced like \u201clist\u201d) was one of the most important musicians of the 19th century. He was the greatest pianist of his time and went on lots of tours through Europe where everyone filled the concert halls to hear him. He wrote a lot of music for piano. Many of his piano pieces were harder to play than anything that had been written before. In this way he developed the technique of piano playing, setting new standards for the future. In his compositions he often used new ideas which sounded very modern in his time. He was very helpful to other composers who lived at that time, helping them to become better known by conducting their works and playing some of their orchestral pieces on the piano.\nEarly years.\nLiszt\u2019s father was an official who worked for Prince Nikolaus Esterh\u00e1zy, the same noble family who employed the composer Joseph Haydn. When he was seven his father started to teach him the piano. He was a child prodigy, and within a year or two he was already playing in concerts. He was so promising that some rich Hungarians said they would pay for his music education.\nIn 1821 his family moved to Vienna. He had piano lessons from Czerny and composition lessons from Salieri. He soon became famous although he was still a young boy, and he met famous musicians like Beethoven and Schubert. Beethoven is supposed to have kissed him on the forehead.\nIn 1823 his family moved again, this time to Paris. He wanted to go to the Conservatoire to study music but Luigi Cherubini would not let him in because he was a foreigner (i.e. not French). So he studied music theory privately with Reicha and composition with Paer. Soon he was asked to play the piano everywhere in Paris. He travelled to London. On his second visit there in 1825 he played to King George IV at Windsor.\nLiszt continued to travel to other countries. After his father died he became a piano teacher in Paris. He fell in love with one of his pupils. It was the first of many love affairs he had with various women. He read a lot of books to try to educate himself properly. He met Berlioz and he liked the music of Berlioz very much. In 1831 he met the violinist Niccol\u00f2 Paganini and he was amazed by his virtuoso playing. Liszt was to do for the piano what Paganini had done for the violin. Both men were drawn by cartoonists as devilish characters. Both men wrote music which was incredibly hard for their instruments.\nSoon Liszt met a Countess called Marie d\u2019Agoult. He began to have an affair with her. The Countess left her husband and went to live with Liszt in Geneva. They lived together for several years and had three children. When Liszt gave away a lot of his money to help pay for a monument to Beethoven in Bonn he had to earn money by going on tours again, so the countess left him. He still saw her and the children every summer for a few years but finally they separated completely.\nLater years.\nLiszt spent eight years in Rome. He wrote a lot of religious music and took orders in the Catholic church. His daughter Cosima, who had married a famous conductor Hans von B\u00fclow, left her husband and lived with Wagner. They had two children together. Liszt and Wagner quarrelled for many years about this.\nLiszt spent most of his last years travelling to and fro between three cities: Rome, Weimar and Budapest. He called this his \u201cvie trifurqu\u00e9e\u201d (three-forked life). He died in Bayreuth July 31, 1886.\nHis personality.\nLiszt had a very strong personality which affected everyone he met. When he played the piano at concerts he was a great showman. People drew caricatures of him playing the piano with his wild mop of hair. He could be very polite and knew how to get on with the aristocracy. He could be very generous, giving both money and time to other musicians and giving praise where it was deserved. He was a powerful, unique character and one of the most important romantic composers of his day. He is known for his dazzling virtuostic piano displays best.\nCompositions.\nMost of Liszt\u2019s compositions were for piano. He wrote one piano sonata. It is in B minor. Its form is very different from the sonatas of composers like Beethoven. It is a very Romantic work, but it does not tell a story like a lot of Romantic pieces do. Mostly his piano works are shorter pieces which are quite free in form. He often took a theme and transforms it (changes it gradually). He wrote studies which are much more than just pieces to improve one\u2019s piano technique. One collection is called \"Transcendental Studies\". In Switzerland he wrote \"Ann\u00e9es de p\u00e8lerinage\" (Years of Wandering), a collection of pieces to which he gave titles later. Liszt explored all the possible sounds that the piano could make (it was still a fairly new instrument). Sometimes he made it sound like an orchestra. Some of his last piano works are much simpler to play, although the chords would have sounded very modern for his time. They are like the Impressionistic music of Debussy.\nNot all Liszt\u2019s piano pieces were original compositions: he also made arrangements or transcriptions. It seems a strange idea to us now to take someone else\u2019s symphony and arrange it for piano. This is what Liszt often did. He took symphonies by Beethoven or songs by Schubert and changed them so that they could be played on the piano. Many people did not have the opportunity to hear concerts very often, and they certainly did not have radios or CDs, so Liszt was making these works more famous, helping them to reach a wider audience. He often made difficult transcriptions which meant that he changed the pieces and added ornamental notes, making a new piece out of an old one.\nLiszt\u2019s orchestral music is also very important. He wrote symphonic poems: pieces which tell a story or describe something. The best known one is called \"Les pr\u00e9ludes\". He also wrote two piano concertos.\nHe wrote a lot of church music. Church music was often quite sentimental in those days, but Liszt tried to make his works help people to feel religious devotion. For composing and performing Liszt was using a variety of pianos (fortepiano). In his Portugal tour as well as in Kiev and Odessa tours, he used a Boisselot piano. This model has been recreated in the XXI century. The composer also owned an Erard piano, a Bechstein piano and Beethoven's Broadwood grand piano.\nConclusion.\nIn many ways Liszt was typical of the Romantic artist. He was always looking for a spiritual meaning to life. He carried a walking stick with the heads of St Francis of Assisi and Gretchen and Mephistopheles, characters from Goethe\u2019s Faust. He was a 19th-century musician but through his thinking and his music he looked forward to the 20th century.\nReferences.\nThe New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie (1980) "}
{"id": "43160", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43160", "title": "Fandom (website)", "text": "Fandom (previously known as Wikia and before that, Wikicities) is an organization for making websites that are wikis. Wikia was started in 2004 by Jimmy Wales, who also started Wikipedia, and Angela Beesley. The name of Wikicities was changed to Wikia on March 27, 2006 to prevent other people from mistaking it for a wiki on cities, and then renamed again on October 4th, 2016 to Fandom for an unknown reason. At the time, it was called \"Fandom powered by Wikia\" until June 2018. Since October 2018, most of the URLs have changed from x.wikia.com to x.fandom.com this does not include wikis based on serious topics which instead changed to x.wikia.org.\nWikis hosted on Fandom are about something which many people will like. All content on Fandom is released under a free license, such as the GNU Free Documentation License or the Creative Commons. Anybody can change pages on wikis at Fandom, so that no single person \"owns\" or is \"the boss\" of a wiki, and so that large communities can be made. The software used is MediaWiki.\nFandom uses advertisements to generate money.\nArticles on Fandom are often written in more \"in-universe\" style; meaning that fictional characters and plots are written as if they are real. Some projects on Fandom are more for people who are very interested in the topic.\nIn August 2010, they said that a new look was coming, making some people take their wikis off the service.\nFandom uses the MediaWiki software."}
{"id": "43162", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43162", "title": "Mozzarella", "text": "Mozzarella is a kind of fresh cheese. Originally, it was Italian but now it can be found all over the world. Its made of the milk of cows or water buffalos. A cheese produced in a similar way, but with sheep's milk is common in Sardinia, Abruzzo and Lazio. It is sometimes called mozzapecora. Mozzarella made with goats milk can also be found. Its development is more recent, though. The main reason it is produced is that goats' milk is easier to digest than that of cows or buffalos.\nMozzarella is common in Italian cuisine. It can be used on pizza.\nMozzarella can be kept in the fridge for a few days, if its covered in brine. \nMozzarella can come in different moistures. "}
{"id": "43163", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43163", "title": "Limburger cheese", "text": "Limburger cheese is a cheese made from cows' milk. Its name comes from the Duchy of Limburg, which is divided between Holland, Belgium and Germany today. Limburger cheese is known for its strong smell, which is caused by the bacterium that lives in its rind. Since about the mid nineteenth century, most Limburger is produced in Germany. \nIn 2006 a study showing that the malaria mosquito (\"Anopheles gambiae\") is attracted equally to the smell of Limburger and to the smell of human feet earned the Ig Nobel Prize in the area of biology. This Cheese has now been placed in strategic locations in Africa to fight against malaria, which is spread by mosquitoes."}
{"id": "43167", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43167", "title": "Landjaeger", "text": ""}
{"id": "43168", "revid": "487535", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43168", "title": "MyScene", "text": "MyScene is a type of doll created by the Mattel Toy Company. They share the product name of Barbie, but they have differences with the head shapes. The line was supposedly started as a rival to the popular Bratz dolls.\nMovies.\nThe My Scene characters have starred in three DVD movies:"}
{"id": "43170", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43170", "title": "Bora Bora", "text": "Bora Bora is a small island in the Leeward group of the Society Islands of French Polynesia, an overseas territory of France in the Pacific Ocean. Vaitape is the largest city on the island with 4,000 people. There is an airport on an islet where residents can fly to other islands in French Polynesia.\nBora Bora has one main road which runs around the island."}
{"id": "43171", "revid": "7857450", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43171", "title": "Appalachian Mountains", "text": "The Appalachian Mountains (French: les Appalaches) are a large group of North American mountains. They are partly in Canada, but mostly in the United States. They form an area from to wide, running from the island of Newfoundland in Canada to central Alabama in the United States. \nThe individual mountains average around 3,000 ft (900 m) in height. The highest is Mt. Mitchell in North Carolina (6,684\u00a0ft or 2,037m). Mt. Mitchell is also the highest point in the United States east of the Mississippi River as well as the highest point in eastern North America.\nThe Appalachian chain is a barrier to east-west travel. Ridgelines and valleys run north-south and travelers must climb them again and again. Only a few mountain passes run east-west. The Erie Canal was built through one of them. In most places the Appalachians are the watershed between the drainage basins of the Mississippi River and the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe term Appalachia is used to refer to the mountain range and the hills and plateau region around it. The term is often used to refer to areas in the central and southern, but not northern, Appalachian Mountains. These areas usually include all of West Virginia and parts of the states of Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, and North Carolina, and sometimes extending as far south as northern Georgia and western South Carolina, as far north as Pennsylvania, and as far west as southeastern Ohio. In 1965 the United States Congress created an Appalachian Regional Commission to include these areas and more, as far west as Mississippi.\nThe Appalachian Trail in the US is about 3,500km (2,190 miles) long and goes through 14 states from Georgia to Maine.\nHistory of the range.\nThe Appalachians today are the worn-down remains of a once huge mountain chain. They first formed about 480 million years ago during the Ordovician. They once were as high as the Alps, the Rocky Mountains and the Atlas Mountains. \nThe birth of the Appalachian ranges, some 480 million years ago (mya), was the first of several mountain-building plate collisions as the supercontinent Pangaea formed. The Appalachians were at the center of the newly formed Pangaea. North America and Africa were connected, and the Appalachians were part of the same mountain chain as the \"Anti-Atlas\" or Little Atlas Mountains in Morocco. This mountain range, known as the Central Pangean Mountains, extended into Scotland, from the North America/Europe collision (see Caledonian orogeny)."}
{"id": "43172", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43172", "title": "Raven-Symon\u00e9", "text": "Raven-Symon\u00e9 Christina Pearman (born December 10, 1985) is an American actress and singer. She was born in Atlanta, Georgia. She moved to Ossining, New York at age three. She played the role of \"Olivia\" in the last three seasons of \"The Cosby Show\" (1984). \nPearman is most well known as the person Raven in the TV show \"That's So Raven\" and other parts in \"The Cheetah Girls\" and \"The Cheetah Girls 2\". Pearman goes by the name Raven for most of her acting.\nIn August 2013 Raven-Symon\u00e9 commented on legalizing gay marriage, \"I was excited to hear today that more states legalized gay marriage. I, however am not currently getting married, but it is great to know I can now, should I wish to\". She was dating AzMarie Livingston since 2012, and in October 2015, she announced that she had broken up with her."}
{"id": "43175", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43175", "title": "Raven Symone", "text": ""}
{"id": "43176", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43176", "title": "Raven Symon\u00e9", "text": ""}
{"id": "43182", "revid": "472850", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43182", "title": "Arabian horse", "text": "The Arabian horse is a breed famous for beauty and stamina. It is one of the oldest horse breeds in the world. Arabian horses are bred with horses of other breeds to add speed, beauty, endurance, and strong bones. Today, Arabian ancestors are found in almost every breed of riding horse.\nThe Arabian horse developed in the deserts of Arabia by the Bedouin people. People sometimes brought their horses into family tent for shelter and protection. This close relationship with humans made the Arabian a horse with a kind temper and quick to learn. It also was used as a war horse. This meant that it needed speed and to be very alert. This blend of traits makes it necessary for people today to treat Arabian horses with kindness and respect. \nBreed Traits.\nArabian horses have triangle-shaped heads, a wide forehead, big eyes, large nostrils, and small muzzles (noses). Most have a concave or \"dished\" profile. They have a slim, arched neck, smooth hindquarters and a naturally high-carried tail. Arabians have strong bone and good feet. They are especially noted for their excellent endurance. Arabians' hair coat colors are bay, gray, chestnut, and black. Arabians can have robicono and/or sabino genes. All Arabians have black skin under their hair coat, except under white markings. \nThe Bedouin sold many Arabian horses to people from Europe. Other Arabian horses were captured in war and taken to other countries outside of the Middle East. Today, Arabian horses are found all over the world. Arabian horse families are now labeled by where their most recent ancestors were bred, such as \"Polish,\" \"Spanish,\" \"Crabbet\" (from England), \"Russian,\" \"Egyptian\", and \"Domestic\" (in the United States), and \"Weil-Marbach\" in Germany. For example, a horse called a \"Polish Arabian\" is an Arabian horse who has recent ancestors that were bred at farms in Poland, from horses the Polish people bought from the Bedouin in Arabia many centuries ago.\nUses.\nArabians compete in many places, including horse racing, horse shows, Endurance riding, show jumping, and more. They also make good pleasure, trail, and working ranch horses for people who do not like competitive events. Arabians also are seen in movies, parades, circuses and other places where horses are used.\nHistory.\nThere are many legends and myths about Arabian horses. One legend says that the prophet Muhammad selected his five finest mares (female horses), called \"Al Khamsa\" (\"the five\") to be the foundation of the Arabian breed. Another legend says the Queen of Sheba gave an Arabian mare to King Solomon, and that is how the breed began. Yet another story says Allah made the Arabian horse from the south wind, saying, \"I create thee, Oh Arabian...I give thee flight without wings.\" \nIn real history, Arabians are one of the oldest human-developed horse breeds in the world. Pictures of \"Proto-Arabian\" horses that looked a lot like modern Arabian horses were painted on rocks in the Arabian Peninsula as far back as 2,500 B.C. The ancestors of the Bedouin probably tamed horses not long after they tamed the camel. A horse skeleton was unearthed in the Sinai peninsula, dated to 1700 B.C., and is considered the earliest proof of the horse in Ancient Egypt. It was probably brought by the Hyksos invaders. This horse had a wedge-shaped head, large eye and small muzzle, just like the Arabian horse today.\nIn the desert, humans were the only source of food and water for the Arabian horse. Where there was no pasture, the Bedouin fed their horses dates, a fruit of the date palm tree, and camel's milk. Arabians needed to live on very little food, and survive a dry climate that was very hot in the day but very cold at night. Weak horses did not live, and the horses who survived the desert also had to survive being ridden for war. Therefore, the Arabian horse became very tough and able to live in a harsh world.\nFamous Arabian horses.\nNapoleon rode a gray Arabian stallion named Marengo. George Washington rode a half-Arabian named Blueskin during the American Revolution. A fictional horse, \"The Black Stallion,\" was played by a real Arabian stallion named Cass Ole in the movie that was based on the book by Walter Farley.\nAziziye Stud.\nIn 1864 the Sultan Abdulaziz, founded a new Horse stud with Arabian horses and sent a commission to purchase in Bialocerkiew, the stud of Count Branicki in Poland, whose breeding have a very good reputation. The Commission purchased 92 horses, including some descendants of the 1855 stallion Indjanin imported from England."}
{"id": "43183", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43183", "title": "Earth's crust", "text": "The Earth's crust is the Earth's hard outer layer. It is less than 1% of Earth's volume. The crust is made up of different types of rocks: igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks.\nBelow the crust is the mantle. The crust and the upper mantle make up the lithosphere. The lithosphere is broken up into tectonic plates that can move.\nThe crust is of two different types. One is the continental crust (under the land) and the other is the oceanic crust (under the ocean). The continental crust is thicker, 30 km (20 mi) to 50 km (30 mi) thick. It is mostly made of less dense, more felsic rocks, such as granite. The oceanic crust is thinner, 5 km (3 mi) to 10 km (6 mi) thick. It is made of denser, more mafic rocks, such as basalt.\nThe temperature of the crust increases with depth because of geothermal energy. Where the crust meets the mantle the temperatures can be between 200\u00a0\u00b0C (392\u00a0\u00b0F) to 400\u00a0\u00b0C (752\u00a0\u00b0F). The crust is the coldest layer because it is exposed to the atmosphere.\nComposition.\nIgneous rocks make up over 90% of Earth's crust by volume.p47 This is not noticeable because they are mostly covered by sedimentary and metamorphic rocks.\nA single family of silicates, the feldspars, account for about half of the material in the crust (60% by weight), and quartz is a sizeable proportion of the rest. Other common minerals are mica and hornblende.\nOnly 8% of Earth's crust is non-silicate minerals, and this includes carbonates, sulfides, chlorides and oxides.\nFormation of the crust.\nEarth's mantle and crust formed about 100 million years after the formation of the planet, about 4.6 billion years ago. At first the crust was very thin, and was probably changed often as the tectonic plates shifted around a lot more than they do now. The crust would have been destroyed many times by asteroids hitting Earth, which was much more common in the Late Heavy Bombardment.\nThe oldest oceanic basalt crust today is only about 200 million years. Most of the continental crust is much older. The oldest continental crustal rocks on Earth are cratons between 3.7 and 4.28 billion years old. These have been found in the Narryer Gneiss Terrane in Western Australia, in the Acasta Gneiss in the Northwest Territories on the Canadian Shield, and on the Fennoscandian Shield. A few zircons at least 4.3 billion years old have been found in the Narryer Gneiss Terrane in Western Australia.\nThe average age of Earth's continental crust is about 2.0 billion years. Most crustal rocks formed before 2.5 billion years ago are in cratons. Such old continental crust and the mantle below it are less dense than other places in the Earth. These are not easily destroyed when the plates shift. The making of new continental crust is linked to times of major orogeny or mountain building. This happens at the same time as the formation of the supercontinents such as Rodinia, Pangaea and Gondwana. The crust forms in part by the coming together of island arcs including granite and metamorphic fold belts. They are kept together partly by the subduction of the mantle below the crust, which makes a mantle on which the crust can float."}
{"id": "43184", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43184", "title": "Food chain", "text": "A food chain shows the feeding relationship between different organisms in a particular environment and/or habitat. Plants are at the bottom of a food chain because they are producers that make their food from a process called photosynthesis . Organisms that can make their own food are called producers. Consumers are animals that eat the products of producers or other animals. The animal that eats the producer is called the primary consumer and it gains the most amount of energy. The animal that eats the primary consumer is called a secondary consumer which in the primary consumer's energy which is transferred becomes lower due to the primary consumer consuming some energy. The animal that eats the secondary consumer is called a tertiary consumer and so on to fourth, fifth, etc. The direction of arrows between the organisms shows who eats what and what gets eaten by what.\nA food chain also represents a series of events and consumption in which food and energy are consumed from one organism in an ecosystem to another. Food chains show how energy is passed from the sun to producers, from producers to consumers, and from consumers to decomposes such as fungi. They also show how animals depend on other organisms for food.\nIn any ecosystem, many food chains overlap. Different food chains may include some of the same organisms. Several consumers may eat the same kind of plant or animal for food. When this happens, the food chain forms a food web. A food web shows how food chains are related within an ecosystem and how the cycles balanced between an equilibrium"}
{"id": "43188", "revid": "7428155", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43188", "title": "Embryology", "text": "Embryology is the study of embryos and their development. The study of embryology starts with the fertilisation of an egg, and continues until the foetus stage. A broader term, developmental biology, covers the whole period of growth from the egg to adult life. \nIn mammals (and some other animals) embryos develop inside the mother, in the mother's womb. Otherwise it takes place after the egg is laid. It most animals, there are various stages between the egg and the adult animal. If the stages are well-defined the process is called metamorphosis. "}
{"id": "43191", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43191", "title": "Histology", "text": "Histology is the study of the microscopic anatomy of cells and tissues of plants and animals, particularly the tissues. It is a part of cytology, and an essential tool of biology and medicine.\nHistology is usually done by looking at cells and tissues under a light microscope or electron microscope. The tissue has to be specially prepared beforehand.\nThe process.\nThe stages below are only described in outline. Laboratories which do histology work from schedules which are much more detailed.\nFixing.\nChemical fixatives are used to preserve tissue from decay. This preserves the structure of the cell and of sub-cellular components such as cell organelles (e.g., nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria). The most common fixative for light microscopy is formalin (4% formaldehyde in saline).\nEmbedding.\nAfter fixing, the block of tissue is embedded in paraffin wax. This holds and preserves the tissue as a block.\nSectioning.\nThe section is cut into a series of wafer-thin slices, each of which is put on a glass microscope slide. The machine which cuts the block is a mechanical guillotine which can be set to cut at a suitable depth for the tissue in question.\nStaining.\nStains are dyes, chemicals used to make cells and tissues easy to see under a microscope. There are many tissue stains, and each of them has advantages and disadvantages.\nHaematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E).\nThis is the most widely used stain in biology and medicine. Haematoxylin colours cell nuclei and eosin colours cell cytoplasm.\nSilver nitrate.\nCamillo Golgi developed a silver nitrate stain for nerve cells. His idea was used by Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal in his famous work on the structure of brain tissue.\nModern techniques.\nElectron microscopy is used often as well as light microscopy. This has its own procedures. Its advantage is that it resolves things which light cannot resolve. For example, viruses were first seen by electron microscopy..\nSpecialised selective stains using immunology or radioactive labelling are now routine. The advantage of using antibodies or radioactive labels is that they stick to \"specific kinds of molecules\". \nIncreasingly popular is tagging with a fluorescent stain, which shows up even if a tiny part of a cell is stained. Immunoinfluorescence is the name of this particular technique."}
{"id": "43192", "revid": "7834789", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43192", "title": "Ann Arbor, Michigan", "text": "Ann Arbor is a city in the US state of Michigan. It is the county seat of Washtenaw County. According to the 2010 United States Census, Ann Arbor was the 6th largest city in Michigan. In 2010, there were 113,934 people living there. The city is part of the Detroit Metropolitan Combined Statistial Area.\nAnn Arbor was started in 1824. It is thought that the city is named after the wife, Ann, of one of the founders. The University of Michigan was moved to Ann Arbor in 1837. (Before that, the University had been in Detroit.) The city grew during the 1800s and 1900s. The only time the city did not grow was the Depression of 1873.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, Ann Arbor was an important place for the Civil Rights Movement, the anti-Vietnam War movement, and for left-wing and liberal politics.\nToday, Ann Arbor is home to the University of Michigan. The University is very important to the city because 30,000 people work for it. 12,000 of these workers work for the University of Michigan Health System, which are hospitals and clinics run by the University. Ann Arbor's economy is also very high-tech. High-tech companies come to the area because there are many graduates and a lot of research and development money at the University."}
{"id": "43194", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43194", "title": "Microbiology", "text": "Microbiology - (Greek \u03bc\u03b9\u03ba\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2, mikr\u00f3s, \u201etiny\u201c, \u03b2\u03af\u03bf\u03c2, b\u00edos, \u201elife\u201c and \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2, l\u00f3gos, \u201escience\u201c) is a science in the composition of biology, which is occupied by the study of microorganisms (bacterium, (archaebacteria), microscopic fungi, protozoa,alga,and viruses). Into the field of the interests of microbiology enter their systematics, morphology, physiology, biochemistry, evolution, role in the ecosystems \nand also the possibility of practical use. Bacteriology is a division of microbiology.\nHistory.\nIn 1665, Robert Hooke saw that cork was made up of little cubes that he named cells. Later Anton van Leeuwenhoek made the important connection that cells are living things when he saw through his early microscope smallest one-celled organisms. Later Christian Ehrenberg found thatprotista or bacteria were different kinds of cells. In the late part of the 1800s Martinus Beijerinck showed that there were small particles called viruses. \nAnother important change in the study of microorganisms came from the discovery of DNA and RNA. This allowed using a vector to change the inside of a cell without killing it. One recent discovery that changed the study of microbiology is the discovery of transposons or jumping genes. Another one is the discovery of animal genes in the cells.\nBranches.\nThe\u00a0branches of microbiology\u00a0can be classified into pure and applied sciences.\u00a0 Microbiology can be also classified based on taxonomy, as in the cases of bacteriology, mycology, protozoology, and phycology. There is considerable overlap between the specific branches of microbiology with each other and with other disciplines. Certain aspects of these branches can extend beyond the traditional scope of microbiology"}
{"id": "43195", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43195", "title": "Transposable element", "text": "A transposable element is often called a transposon. It is a sequence of DNA that can move to new positions in the genome of a single cell. The press sometimes call them jumping genes, but it is not correct to call them 'genes'.\nTransposons were first found by Barbara McClintock while working on maize in the 1930s to 1950s. She discovered transposition in maize, but it took years before her work was understood. She received a Nobel Prize for her work in 1983.\nTransposition can create significant mutations and alter the cell's genome size.\nTypes.\nTransposons are only one of several types of mobile genetic elements.\nTransposons themselves are of two types according to their mechanism, which can be either \"copy and paste\" (class I) or \"cut and paste\" (class II).\nClass I (Retrotransposons, aka \"retoposons\"):\nThey copy themselves in two stages, first from DNA to RNA by transcription, then from RNA back to DNA by reverse transcription. The DNA copy is then inserted into the genome in a new position. Retrotransposons behave very similarly to retroviruses, such as HIV.\nClass II (DNA transposons):\nBy contrast, the cut-and-paste transposition mechanisms of class II transposons do not involve an RNA intermediate.\nAs causes of disease.\nTransposons are mutagens. They can damage the genome of their host cell in different ways:\nUse.\nTransposons can carry accessory genes, such as antibiotic resistance genes. They can be used to put a gene into the DNA of an organism. This has been done with fruit flies (\"Drosophila melanogaster\") by putting the transposon into the embryo.\nEvolution.\nTransposons are found in many forms of life. They may have arisen independently many times, or perhaps just once and then spread to other kingdoms by horizontal gene transfer.\nWhile some transposons may confer benefits on their hosts, most are regarded as selfish DNA parasites. In this way, they are similar to viruses. Various viruses and transposons also share features in their genome structures and biochemical abilities, leading to speculation that they share a common ancestor.\nExcessive transposon activity can destroy a genome, which is lethal. Many organisms have developed mechanisms to inhibit them. Bacteria may delete transposons and viruses from their genomes; eukaryotic organisms use RNA interference (RNAi) to inhibit transposon activity.\nIn vertebrate animal cells nearly all the 100,000+ DNA transposons in a genome code for inactive polypeptides. In humans, all of the Class I-like transposons are inactive. The first DNA transposon used as a tool for genetic purposes, the Sleeping Beauty transposon system, was a transposon which was resurrected from a long evolutionary sleep.\nRole in the immune system.\nTransposons may have been co-opted by the vertebrate immune system as a means of producing antibody diversity: The V(D)J recombination system operates by a mechanism similar to that of transposons. This is a system of three genes which get rearranged in the production of vertebrate lymphocytes. The system diversely encode proteins to match antigens from bacteria, viruses, parasites, dysfunctional cells such as tumor cells, and pollens.\nThe final DNA sequence, and thus the sequence of the antibody, is highly variable, even when the same two V, D, or J segments are joined. This great diversity allows VDJ recombination to generate antibodies even to microbes that neither the organism nor its ancestors have ever previously encountered."}
{"id": "43199", "revid": "286637", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43199", "title": "Toowoomba", "text": "Toowoomba (also called 'Garden City' by people who live there) is a city in South East Queensland, Australia. It is 132 km west of Brisbane, and two hours drive from the Gold Coast and Sunshine Coast beaches. About 115,000 people live there, which makes Toowoomba Australia's second largest city that is not on the coast, after Canberra.\nEvery year in September, Toowoomba holds its annual Flower Festival. When this is taking place, the town, especially its CBD are decorated with flowers. People who live there may also open their gardens for public judging for the garden competitions. Another attraction is the parade, where one would see floats with flower themes. Many people from all over the nation visit the festival, and a popular way to arrive is on the specially operating retired steam train.\nAnother major event held in Toowoomba is the Easterfest. It is a large religious festival that thousands of people come to, to see many famous singers perform. Many put up tents on in Queens Park.\nToowoomba is also known for its historical buildings, such as the town hall, The Empire Theatre, and the Cobb &amp; Co Museum. The town hall was the first in Queensland to be built for a town hall. The Empire Theatre was built as a silent movie house in 1911. A fire nearly destroyed the building, but it was built again, and reopened in 1933. Now, it is the biggest regional theatre in Australia. The Cobb &amp; Co Museum began in the 1880s as a small mail run. It moved both mail and passengers to Brisbane and further.\nToowoomba is also home to some notable private schools, including Toowoomba Grammar School (which is a GPS school), Downlands College, and The Glenny School, none of which are 'co-educational'.\nDuring the 2010-2011 Queensland floods, several people were drowned in their cars when water flooded the main shopping centre."}
{"id": "43200", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43200", "title": "Albury, New South Wales", "text": "Albury is a city in New South Wales, Australia. It is on the Hume Highway that runs between Sydney and Melbourne. The Murray River separates Albury from Wodonga. Albury is on the north side of the Murray River. The river is also the border between Victoria and New South Wales. It is about 550 km from the state capital Sydney, but only 312 km from the Victorian capital Melbourne. Albury is believed to have been named after Aldbury in Hertfordshire.\nThe Australian Aboriginal people called the area Bungambrewatha. There are a number of historical aboriginal sites including rock paintings. There are also scarred trees, where the bark has been removed to make shields and canoes. The rich river flats would have provided food for native animals, and the wetlands would have been home to large numbers of water birds.\nThe first Europens to arrive in the area were the explorers, Hamilton Hume and William Hovell in 1824. They made their mark in a tree on the riverbank which later became the spot where people heading south would cross the river. Crossing the river was easy in summer when the water level was low. By 1844 a ferry was built to carry people over the river all year. There were soon many farmers moving into the area with large flocks of sheep. Some of the first in Albury were William Wyse and Charles Ebden."}
{"id": "43204", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43204", "title": "Saloth Sar", "text": ""}
{"id": "43205", "revid": "1060941", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43205", "title": "Francisco de Goya", "text": "Francisco Jos\u00e9 de Goya y Lucientes (30 March 1746 \u2013 30 April 1828) was a Spanish painter. He painted many portraits of the Spanish Royal Family. His most famous paintings are \"Charles IV of Spain and His Family\" and \"The Third of May 1808\". He regularly painted the famous Duchess of Alba.\nLife.\nYouth.\nGoya was born in Fuendetodos, in the region of Arag\u00f3n, Spain, in 1746. His parents were Jos\u00e9 Benito de Goya y Franque and Gracia de Lucientes y Salvador. He spent his childhood in Fuendetodos. His father's work was gilding (putting gold onto picture frames). In about 1749, the family moved to a house in the city of Zaragoza. Goya went to school at Escuelas Pias. He became best friends with Martin Zapater. Through their lives, they wrote many letters to each other. Because of these letters, historians know a lot about Goya's life. When he was 14 Goya became an apprentice to the painter Jos\u00e9 Luz\u00e1n.\nGoya later moved to Madrid where he studied with Anton Raphael Mengs, a painter who was popular with Spanish royalty. Goya and Mengs did not like each other, and Goya got bad marks in his examinations. Goya tried to join the Spanish Royal Academy of Fine Art in 1763 and 1766, but failed.\nHe then traveled to Rome. In 1771 he won second prize in a painting competition in the city of Parma. Later that year, he returned to Zaragoza. He got work painting frescos in several buildings including the dome of the Basilica of the Pillar. He studied with the painter Francisco Bayeu y Sub\u00edas. His painting began to show the style which later made his famous.\nSuccess.\nGoya married Bayeu's sister, Josefa, in 1774. Francisco Bayeu was a member of the Spanish Royal Academy of Fine Art. This helped Goya to get work with the Royal Tapestry Workshop. He worked there for 5 years, and designed 42 patterns. Many of his designs were made into tapestries and used to decorate the bare stone walls of the royal palaces, such as El Escorial. The Spanish Royal family saw his works and later gave him work as a portrait painter. He also painted an altarpiece (Holy picture) for the Church of San Francisco El Grande. Because of this picture, Goya was at last made a member of the Spanish Royal Academy of Fine Art.\nIn 1783, the Count of Florida blanca, commissioned Goya (gave Goya the paid work) to paint his portrait. Then King Charles III of Spain and other important people wanted Goya to paint their portraits. Goya became friends with Crown Prince Don Luis, and lived in his house. From 1788, in the reign of Charles IV, Goya became even more popular.\nLater life.\nIn the 1790s Goya became ill. It is not known exactly what his illness was. It is believed that he suffered mental breakdown. He may have had viral encephalitis or several strokes. He may have suffered from dementia. It is also thought that he may have been poisoned by lead paint. His sight, hearing, balance and mental health were all affected. From the 1790s onwards he began to paint pictures showing sad, violent subjects. His unhappiness was also affected by the French invasion of Spain in 1808. One of his most famous paintings, \"The Third of May 1808\", is about the execution of Spanish men trying to defend their country.\nAfter the defeat of the French, Goya did not get on well with King Ferdinand VII. Goya moved to a house far away from the court. He lived there with his housekeeper and her daughter, and taught painting to the girl, Rosario Weiss. Some of the walls of the house are painted with strange dark pictures, but it is not sure whether Goya did them. For two years Goya lived in France but returned to Spain where he was warmly welcomed home in 1826, He died in 1828 at the age of 82. \nWorks.\nCourt paintings.\nGoya's early cartoons for the royal tapestries are merry scenes of festivals in bright colours.\nGoya painted portraits of many famous people, including the Duke of Wellington. His paintings of the Royal Family of Charles IV of Spain and Ferdinand VII show them looking like very ordinary people, not like proud nobility. Queen Maria Luisa was delighted with the large portrait that he did of her family in 1800, even though a French writer Th\u00e9ophile Gautier said that Goya made them look \"like the corner baker and his wife after they had won the lottery\".\nThe \"Majas\".\nTwo of Goya's most famous paintings were owned by a member of the royal court, Manuel de Godoy. These two paintings are called \"The Nude Maja\" (\"La maja desnuda\") and \"The Clothed Maja\" (\"La maja vestida\"). The nude painting was thought of as very shocking. In 1813, the Inquisition said that both paintings were pornography and took them away. They were returned to Goya in 1836. Nobody knows who the woman was that posed for Goya. One idea is that she was the Duchess of Alba. She may have been Godoy's mistress. Perhaps Goya painted the figure from his imagination. There is only one earlier nude painting by a Spanish artist, Velazquez's \"Venus and Cupid\", (see National Gallery, London). When this painting was done, other nude figures, painted in Italy, Germany and other countries, always showed the woman as a goddess from mythology or had some other \"allegorical\" meaning (was a symbol of some sort). This painting is unusual because the nude figure is not meant to be a Goddess and does not seem to have any symbolic meaning. It is the very first life-sized female nude in Western Painting that is just about the beauty of the female body.\nLater works.\n In 1793 and 1794 Goya was recovering from his illness. During this time, he painted eleven small pictures painted on tin. These pictures are known as \"Fantasy and Invention\" today. They show a change in his art. From that time on, he painted dark, frightening pictures about war, violence and madness.\nOne painting is called \"Courtyard with Lunatics\". It is a scene in a mental asylum. It is about loneliness and fear. It shows how mentally ill people have trouble dealing with other people and normal life. Goya was the first artist to paint people with mental illness in a realistic way. Goya wanted to show that it was wrong to punish mentally ill people, and lock them up with criminals. There was a movement at this time to improve the life of people in asylums and prisons.\nGoya made two series of prints. The first was called \"Caprichos\" and the second was called \"The Disasters of War\". The \"Caprichos\" series shows nightmarish scenes of the problems with Spanish society. \"The Disaster of War\" shows scenes of terrible violence. These were not published until more than 30 years after his death. \"The Disaster of War\" were made because of the war between France and Spain. One of Goya's most famous paintings is a large picture called \"The Third of May 1808\".(see above) It is about the executions of Spanish men that took place in 1808. This painting shows the courage of the unarmed Spanish hero. It shows the French soldiers in the firing squad acting as if they have no minds or feelings. This painting was a great inspiration to other painters such as the French painter Manet who painted a scene of the execution of the Governor of Mexico.\nGoya's most frightening picture shows a giant man, eating people. It is now called \"Saturn Devouring His Sons\", (after Saturn the Father of the Gods in Greek mythology) but no-one knows what it really means. It is more likely a picture of the way that War destroys people. In the house that Goya owned, there are paintings on the walls known as the \"Black Paintings\". They show scenes with the Devil and witches. It is not sure whether Goya really painted them. Overall he was a pretty cool guy \nInfluence.\nGoya's brightly coloured tapestry cartoons influenced the French Impressionist painters such as Monet and Renoir. His portraits were an influence on Manet and Degas as well as Renoir. The \"Black Paintings\" influenced Expressionist painters."}
{"id": "43206", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43206", "title": "SATA", "text": ""}
{"id": "43207", "revid": "3317", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43207", "title": "Xor", "text": ""}
{"id": "43208", "revid": "4056", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43208", "title": "Eclusive disjunction", "text": ""}
{"id": "43209", "revid": "917214", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43209", "title": "Inclusive disjunction", "text": "Inclusive disjunction (also called or) is a logic operation. It normally takes two truth values as inputs and returns one truth value as output. It is false when both inputs are false, but is true otherwise. It is written with the symbol formula_1.\nIn general, given two propositions formula_2 and formula_3, formula_4 is true if formula_2 is true, or if formula_3 is true, or if both formula_2 and formula_3 are true.\nThis is different from the exclusive disjunction, which asserts \"either \"x\" or \"y\", but not both\"."}
{"id": "43210", "revid": "917214", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43210", "title": "Logical conjunction", "text": "Logical conjunction (very often called and) is a logic operation. It is represented by the symbol formula_1. Logical conjunction takes two truth values as inputs and returns an output. If both of the inputs are \"true\" at the same time, then logical conjunction outputs \"true\". If one of the inputs is false, or if both of the inputs are false, then logical conjunction outputs \"false\". Its logic gate equivalent is the AND gate."}
{"id": "43211", "revid": "917214", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43211", "title": "Logical negation", "text": "Logical negation (also known as not) is a logic operation. For a proposition formula_1, its negation is written as formula_2. It takes one input. It flips the value of the input as the output. If the input was true, it returns false; If the input was false, it returns true."}
{"id": "43212", "revid": "917214", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43212", "title": "Logic equality", "text": "Logical equality is a logical operation. It corresponds to equality (formula_1) in Boolean algebra and biconditional (written formula_2 or formula_3) in logic. It takes two inputs. It returns true if both inputs are true or if both inputs are false. Otherwise (when they are different), it returns false."}
{"id": "43213", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43213", "title": "Implication (logic)", "text": "Implication (also known as logical consequence, implies, or If ... then) is a logical operation. It is the relationship between statements that holds true when one logically \"follows from\" one or more others. While a statement of the form \"if \"P\" then \"Q\" is often written as formula_1, the assertion that \"Q\" is a logical consequence \"P\"\" is often written as formula_2.\nImplications take two arguments. It returns false if and only if the first term is true and the second term is false.\nThis may be problematic, because it means that from a false proposition, anything can follow.\nExamples.\nThe following shows a (valid) implication\nOn the other hand, the statement \"I promise that if I am healthy, I will come to class\" has four possibilities:\nIn the second scenario, the statement is false, since the promise is broken. In other scenarios, the statement is true, since the promise is kept."}
{"id": "43215", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43215", "title": "Hellenistic art", "text": "The art of the Hellenistic time (from 400 B.C. to the end of the first century B.C.) in Greece) is sculpture and painting and other things. For a long time, people said that the art of that time was not good. Pliny the Elder talked about the Greek sculpture of the classical time (500 B.C. - 323 B.C., the time before the Hellenistic time) and then said \"Cessavit deinde ars\" (\"then art stopped\"). But much good art is from the Hellenistic time. Many people know about the sculptures Laoco\u00f6n (in the picture) and Venus de Milo and Winged Victory of Samothrace.\nNow more people have looked at writing about the Hellenistic time. People discovered art from the Hellenistic time at Vergina and other places. Now people can see that the art of the Hellenistic time is very good art.\nArchitecture.\nOne of the things that made the Hellenistic time different from other times was the division of Alexander the Great's country into smaller parts. In every part there was a family of leaders. The Ptolemies had Egypt; the Seleucids had Mesopotamia, the Attalids had Pergamon, and other leaders had other parts. Every family of leaders gave money for art in a way that was different from the way the city-states did it. They made big cities and complex groups of buildings in a way that most city-states had already stopped doing by 500 BC. This way of making buildings was new for Greece. This way was not to try to change or fix a natural place, but to make the buildings fit the natural place. There were many places for pleasure, for example many theatres and places to walk. The Hellenistic countries were lucky because they had much empty space where they could make big new cities. Some of their new cities were Antioch, Pergamon, and Seleucia on the Tigris.\nPergamon is a very good example of Hellenistic architecture. It started with a simple fortress on the Acropolis (a very big rock).\nDifferent Attalid kings added to it and made a huge group of buildings. The buildings stretch out from the Acropolis in many directions, using the natural way of that part of the earth. The agora, on the south on the lowest level, has galleries along its sides, with \"stoai\" (beautiful tall stone things to hold up the roof.) The agora is the beginning of a street which goes through the whole Acropolis. On the east and top of the rock are the buildings of the organizers, leaders and soldiers. On the west side, at a middle level, are religious buildings. One of the biggest ones is the one with the Pergamon Altar which is called \"of the gods and of the giants\" and is one of the most beautiful pieces of Greek sculpture. A very big theatre has benches stretched out over the sides of the hill, for people to sit on, and is able to hold almost 10,000 people.\nAt that time they liked to make very big things. The second temple of Apollo at Didyma was like that. It was twenty kilometers from Miletus in Ionia. Daphnis of Miletus made the design for it at the end of the fourth century B.C. (about 300 B.C.) but it was never finished. They continued building it until the 2nd century A.D. (past 100 A.D.). The sanctuary (special part of the temple) is one of the largest ever made near the Mediterranean. Inside a very big room, the \"cella\" has two rows of columns (tall round things) around it. The columns are the Ionic kind, almost 20 metres tall, with much complex stone art on the bases and tops.\nSculpture.\nHellenistic sculpture includes portraits which show things such as suffering, sleep or old age. \nAttalus I (269-197 BC), to commemorate his victory at Caicus against the Gauls \u2014 called Galatians by the Greeks \u2014 had two series of votive groups sculpted: the first, consecrated on the Acropolis of Pergamon, includes the famous Gaul killing himself and his wife, of which the original is lost (the best copy is in the Massimo alle Terme museum of Rome, see illustration); the second group, offered to Athens, is composed of small bronzes of Greeks, Amazons, gods and giants, Persians and Gauls. Artemis Rospigliosi of the Louvre is probably a copy of one of them; as for copies of the Dying Gaul, they were very numerous in the Roman period. The expression of sentiments, the forcefulness of details \u2014 bushy hair and moustaches here \u2014 and the violence of the movements are characteristic of the Pergamene style.\nThese characteristics are pushed to their peak in the friezes of the Great Altar of Pergamon, decorated under the order of Eumenes II (197-159 BC) with a gigantomachy stretching 110 metres in length, illustrating in the stone a poem composed especially for the court. The Olympians triumph in it, each on his side, over Giants most of which are transformed into savage beasts: serpents, birds of prey, lions or bulls. Their mother Gaia, come to their aid, can do nothing and must watch them twist in pain under the blows of the gods.\nAnother phenomenon appears in Hellenistic sculpture: privatization, which involves the recapture of older public patterns in decorative sculpture. This type of retrospective style also exists in ceramics. As for the portraits, they are tinged with naturalism, under the influence of Roman art.\nPaintings and mosaics.\nFew Greek wall paintings have survived the centuries. However, we can study the Hellenistic influences in Roman frescoes, for example those of Pompeii or Herculaneum. Certain mosaics provide a pretty good idea of the \"grand painting\" of the period: these are copies of frescoes. An example is the Alexander Mosaic, showing the confrontation of the young conqueror and the Grand King Darius III at the Battle of Issus, a mosaic which adorns the walls of the House of the Faun at Pompeii. It is believed to be a copy of a work described by Pliny the Elder (XXXV, 110) which had been painted by Philoxenus of Eretria for King Cassander of Macedon at the end of the 4th century BC. The mosaic allows us to admire the choice of colours, the composition of the ensemble with turning movement and facial expressivity.\nArcheological discoveries at the cemetery of Pagasae (close to modern Volos), at the edge of the Pagasetic Gulf, or again at Vergina (1987), in the former kingdom of Macedonia, have brought to light some original works. For example, the tomb said to be that of Philip II has provided a great frieze representing a royal lion hunt, remarkable by its composition, the arrangement of the figures in space and its realistic representation of nature.\nThe Hellenistic period is equally the time of development of the mosaic, particularly with the works of Sosos of Pergamon, active in the 2nd century BC and the only mosaic artist cited by Pliny (XXXVI, 184). His taste for\ntrompe l'oeil (optical illusion) and the effects of the medium are found in several works attributed to him such as the \"Unswept Floor\" in the Vatican museum, representing the leftovers of a repast (fish bones, bones, empty shells, etc.) and the \"Dove Basin\" at the Capitoline Museum, known by means of a reproduction discovered in Hadrian's Villa. In it one sees four doves perched on the edge of a basin filled with water. One of them is watering herself while the others seem to be resting, which creates effects of reflections and shadow perfectly studied by the artist.\nCeramics.\nThe Hellenistic period is that of the decline of painting on vases. The most common vases are black and uniform, with a shiny appearance approaching that of varnish, decorated with simple motifs of flowers or festoons. It is also the period when vases in relief appeared, doubtless in imitation of vases made of precious metals: wreaths in relief were applied to the body of the vase, or again the one shown here received veins or gadroons. One finds also more complex relief, based on animals or legendary creatures. The shapes of the vases are also inspired by the tradition of metal: thus with the lagynos (pictured here), a wine jar typical of the period.\nIn parallel there subsisted a tradition of polychromatic figurative painting: the artists sought a greater variety of tints than in the past. However, these newer colours are more delicate and do not support heat. The painting occurred therefore after firing, contrary to the traditional practice. The fragility of the pigments preventing frequent use of these vases, they were reserved for use in funerals.\nThe most representative copies of this style come from Centuripe in Sicily, where a workshop was active until the 3rd century B.C. These vases are characterized by a base painted pink. The figures, often female, are represented in coloured clothing: blue-violet chiton, yellow himation, white veil. The style is reminiscent of Pompei and is situated much more on the side of the grand contemporary paintings than on the heritage of the red-figure pottery.\nMinor arts.\nMetallic art.\nProgress in bronze casting made it possible for the Greeks to create large works, such as the Colossus of Rhodes, with a height of 32 meters. Many of the large bronze statues were lost - with the majority being melted to recover the material. Because of this, only the smaller objects still exist. Fortunately, during Hellenistic Greece, the raw materials were plentiful following eastern conquests.\nThe work on metal vases took on a new fullness: the artists competed among themselves with great virtuosity. At Panagyurishte (now in Bulgaria), skilfully sculpted gold vases have been found: on an amphora, two rearing centaurs form the handles. In Derveni, not far from Salonica, a tomb has provided a great krater with bronze volutes dating from approximately 320 BC and weighing 40 kilograms (Derveni krater).\nIt is decorated with a 32-centimetre-tall frieze of figures in relief representing Dionysus surrounded by Ariadne and her procession of satyrs and maenads.\nThe neck is decorated with ornamental motifs while four satyrs in high relief are casually seated on the shoulders of the vase. The evolution is similar for the art of jewellery. The jewellers of the time excelled at handling details and filigrees: thus, the funeral wreaths present very realistic leaves of trees or stalks of wheat. In this period the insetting of precious stones flourished.\nThe figurines were equally fashionable. They represented divinities as well as subjects from contemporary life. Thus emerged the theme of the \"negro\", particularly in Ptolemaic Egypt: these statuettes of Black adolescents were successful up to the Roman period. Sometimes, they were reduced to echoing a form from the great sculptures: thus one finds numerous copies in miniature of the Tyche (good luck) of Antioch, of which the original dates to the beginning of the 3rd century BC.\nTerra cotta figurines.\nPreviously reserved for religious use, in Hellenistic Greece the Greek terracotta figurine was more frequently used for funerary, and even decorative, purposes. The refinement of molding techniques made it possible to create true miniature statues, with a high level of detail.\nIn Tanagra, in Boeotia, the figurines, full of lively colours, most often represent elegant women in scenes full of charm. At Smyrna, in Asia Minor, two major styles occurred side-by-side: first of all, copies of masterpieces of great sculpture, such as Farnese Hercules in gilt terra cotta. In a completely different genre, there are the \"grotesques\", which contrast violently with the canons of \"Greek beauty\": the \"koroplathos\" (figurine maker) fashions deformed bodies in tortuous poses \u2014 hunchbacks, epileptics, hydrocephalics, obese women, etc. One could therefore wonder whether these were medical models, the town of Smyrna being reputed for its medical school. Or they could simply be caricatures, designed to provoke laughter. The \"grotesques\" are equally common at Tarsus and also at Alexandria.\nArt of glass and glyptic.\nIt was in the Hellenistic period that the Greeks, who until then only knew molded glass, discovered the technique of glass blowing, thus permitting new forms. The art of glass developed especially in Italy. Molded glass continued, notably in the creation of intaglio jewelry.\nThe art of engraving on gems hardly advanced at all, limiting itself to mass-produced items that lacked originality. As compensation, the cameo made its appearance. It concerns cutting in relief on a stone composed of several colored layers, allowing the object to be presented in relief through the effects of color. After that it is mounted on a pendant or as a ring. The Hellenistic period produced some masterpieces like the Gonzaga cameo , now preserved at the Hermitage Museum."}
{"id": "43216", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43216", "title": "Interest", "text": "Interest is the cost for borrowing money or the payment for lending money. Usually, this is fixed as a percentage of the amount of money borrowed (which is called \"interest rate\").\nSimple and Compound interest.\nIf the interest charged on $100 is 1 percent per year then every year the borrower must pay $1. If the $1 is not added to the amount owed then the borrower is paying simple interest. If simple interest of 1 percent is paid each year at the end of 100 years the borrower would have paid $100 in interest, $1 each year, and would still owe $100. If the $1 is added to the $100 the amount owed will increase to $101. 1 percent interest on $101 will be more than $1. This is called compound interest. Compound interest will cause the amount to grow each year. As the amount grows larger more is paid as interest each year and added to the total. If compound interest of 1 percent is paid on a loan of $100 each year the amount of interest paid will slightly increase and after 70 years the amount owed will have grown to $200 and the interest payment will have increased to $2. \nRule of 73.\n1 percent compound interest on $100 will cause the amount to double to $200 in about 70 years. That is called the rule of 73 which can be used to figure out how fast something grows. The rule can be used to figure out how fast anything that always grows exponentially at the same rate will double in size. Suppose a kangaroo grows 10 percent a year; dividing 10 into 70 gives 7, so the kangaroo will double in size in 7 years. If the kangaroo grew 7 percent a year it would take 10 years for its size to double. If it only grew 2 percent it would take 35 years for its size to double.\nUsury.\nAt some times in the past, or in some places today, it has been illegal to make a person pay interest on a loan. It was, or is, against some religious rules. If the interest that a person must pay is too high, this is called usury. This is often illegal today, even when lower interest is legal.\nOther meanings of interest.\nInterest can also be the care or concern that someone has for something or someone. If someone cares about something, they \"have an interest\" in that thing, or they \"find it interesting\". If something is beautiful, or funny, or new, that might make the thing interesting. However, a very important concern, for example love or hate, is more than an interest. An interest can also be a task that someone likes to do or watch, like a game or a hobby.\nIf someone has a legal right to something (usually money or property) they have an interest in that thing. This is also true for someone who shares a right with others, or a person who has a future right to something. For example, if some brothers and sisters will be given a house after their parents die, each of them \"has a financial interest\" in the house, even if the parents are still living."}
{"id": "43217", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43217", "title": "Newcastle, New South Wales", "text": "Newcastle is a city in New South Wales, Australia. It is also the second oldest city in Australia. Newcastle is 160km north of Sydney, and is the largest coal-harbour in the world. 500,000 people live in Newcastle making it second largest city in New South Wales. Newcastle was started in 1804 by Lieutenant Charles Menzies and was for convicts who mined the coal. It is named Newcastle after the English coal harbour of Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Newcastle has lots of things to do such as restaurants and food."}
{"id": "43219", "revid": "527152", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43219", "title": "Era", "text": "An era in geology is a time of several hundred million years. It describes a long series of rock strata which geologists decide should be given a name. An example is the Mesozoic era, when dinosaurs lived on the Earth. \nAn era is made up of periods, and several eras make up an eon. The Phanerozoic eon started about 541 million years ago (mya). It is made up of the Paleozoic era (from the Greek for \"oldest life\"), the Mesozoic era (\"middle life\") and the Cainozoic era (\"latest life\")."}
{"id": "43220", "revid": "1068258", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43220", "title": "Drowning", "text": "Drowning is a form of death caused by being suffocated with water or another liquid.\nNear drowning is the survival of a drowning event where the person is unconsciousness (passed out) or breathes in a dangerously large amount of water, and can cause serious problems, including death, later on. That means that near drowning also requires help from a doctor. \nSecondary drowning is death caused by chemical or biological changes in the lungs after a near drowning incident.\nDrowning happens when a person spends too much time underwater or with their nose and mouth submerged in a liquid to the point where they are unable to breathe and their lungs are full of liquid.\nIn many countries, drowning is one of the biggest causes of death for children under 14 years old. Children have drowned in wading pools and even bathtubs. Many people drown in countries where there is a lot of water, especially if they swim in dangerous waters. For example, in the United Kingdom there are about 450 drownings each year (that is: 1 per 150,000 of its people), and in the United States there are about 6,500 drownings (or around 1 per 50,000 of its people). Drowning related injuries are the fifth most likely cause of accidental death in the US. In some places, drowning is the second most likely cause of injury and death for children. \nPrevention.\nThere are many ways in which drowning can be prevented. Some examples are: "}
{"id": "43221", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43221", "title": "Erwin Schrodinger", "text": ""}
{"id": "43222", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43222", "title": "Schr\u00f6dinger's cat", "text": "Schr\u00f6dinger's cat is a thought experiment about quantum physics. Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger suggested it in 1935, in reaction to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics. \nSchr\u00f6dinger wrote:\nIn simple terms, Schr\u00f6dinger stated that if you place a cat and something that could kill the cat (a radioactive atom) in a box and sealed it, you would not know if the cat was dead or alive until you opened the box, so that until the box was opened, the cat was (in a sense) \"both\" \"dead and alive\". This is used to represent how scientific theory works. No one knows if any scientific theory is right or wrong until said theory can be tested and proved.\nPhysics can be divided into two types; classic physics and quantum mechanics. Classic physics explains most physical interactions, like why a ball bounces when it drops. It can also be used to predict physical interactions, like what will happen when you drop a ball. However, there are some physical interactions which it does not explain; for instance, how light can be turned into electricity. Quantum mechanics provides a way for physicists to explain why these things happen. \nThe Copenhagen interpretation is used to explain what is happening to the smallest part of an atom (a sub atomic particle) without looking at it (observing it or measuring it). Mathematics are used to show how likely something is to happen to the particle. A particle could be described as being 50% likely to be in one place at one time, or 50% likely to be in one place at another time. This could also be expressed as a chart (or wave form). This is very convenient when making quantum physics calculations. \nHowever the only way to be 100% sure of where a particle is, is to observe it. Up until the point that you observe it, the Copenhagen Interpretation says that the particle is there and is not there. It is only when you observe the particle that you know if it's there or not there. \nWhile this makes sense in quantum physics, it does not make sense in classical (real world) physics. \nSchr\u00f6dinger wanted to show that this way of thinking about quantum mechanics would lead to absurd situations. He designed a thought experiment. \n\"A cat is placed in a room that is separated from the outside world. \"\n\"A Geiger counter which counts the amount of radioactive decay and a little bit of a radioactive element are in the room. \"\n\"Within one hour, one of the atoms of the radioactive material might decay (or break down because the material is not stable), or it may not. \"\n\"If the material breaks down, it will release an atomic particle, which will hit the geiger counter, which will release poison gas, which will kill the cat.\"\nThe question now is: at the end of the hour, is the cat alive or dead? Schr\u00f6dinger says that according to the Copenhagen Interpretation, as long as the door is closed, the cat is dead and alive. There is no way to know until the door is opened. But by opening the door, the person is interfering with the experiment. The person and the experiment have to be described with reference to each other.\nBy \"looking\" at the experiment the person has influenced the experiment, therefore it may not give us the correct answer. \nThe thought experiment was invented by Schr\u00f6dinger to demonstrate the foolishness of thinking about quantum states for large objects. It has also been referenced many times in pop culture."}
{"id": "43224", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43224", "title": "Wollongong, New South Wales", "text": "Wollongong is a city in New South Wales, Australia. It is on the eastern coast of Australia, , just over one hour from the south of Sydney and 2.5 hours from Canberra. It is the third largest city in New South Wales, after Sydney and Newcastle."}
{"id": "43225", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43225", "title": "Yule", "text": "Yuletide is a pagan holiday also known as the Winter solstice. Generally celebrated by Wiccans and Northern European Christians. \"Yuletide\" celebrates the birth of the Sun and also celebrates the \"Mother\" at the height of her \"Greatness\". \nPagans celebrate Yuletide in many ways, most will decorate a \"Yuletide\" tree, keep it in their homes until most of the leaves fall off then burn the Yule log. Many Wiccans will decorate their alters with Yule colours and items and generally just honour the Goddess.\nYuletide in Christianity.\nThe Christian holiday, Christmas, was created by the Christian Romans based around the polytheistic (many Gods) Sun God festival (Sol Invictis) on the winter solstice, and people in northern Europe combined it with their Yule festival. Yule is celebrated on the 25th of December by most Northern Europeans and the 21st of December, by Wiccans and many non religious groups. For them, Yule is celebrated as the longest night of the year. It is the night when the sun sets earliest and rises latest the next day. The Wiccan ritual includes thanking the Goddess for the past year and asking for a happiness in the year to come.\nOther websites.\nSo Amal was born in 2006, May 31th"}
{"id": "43229", "revid": "268071", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43229", "title": "List of cities in Australia", "text": "This is a list of cities in Australia sorted by state."}
{"id": "43230", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43230", "title": "Darwin, Australia", "text": ""}
{"id": "43231", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43231", "title": "Gameboy Video", "text": ""}
{"id": "43233", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43233", "title": "Warrnambool, Victoria", "text": "Warrnambool is a city on the south-western coast of Victoria, Australia. About 32,000 people live in the city. It is at the western end of the Great Ocean Road. It is also on the Princes Highwaywhich links Melbourne and Adelaide. Warrnambool is 265 kilometres and 3 hours from Melbourne by road or rail. The name \"Warrnambool\" is an Indigenous Australian word meaning \"water between two rivers\", \"two swamps\", or \"plenty of water\".\nThere are daily trains to Melbourne, via Geelong, and buses to Ballarat, Hamilton and Mount Gambier, South Australia.\nThe average maximum temperatures are 22 C in summer and 14 C in winter.\nThe Mahogany Ship.\nIt is possible that the first European people to come to Warrnambool arrived in the 1500s. There is a wrecked ship in the sand dunes near Warrnambool which historians believe is an early Portuguese ship. It may have been part of an expedition in 1522, led by Christovao Mendonca. The wreck was first seen in 1836, but the last sighting was in 1880. Tt is now covered in sand, and its exact location is now unknown. It is just one of the 80 wrecked ships along the coast. There are 29 wrecks in Lady Bay at Warrnambool. The first recorded exploration of this part of the Victorian coast was by the French explorer Nicholas Baudin in 1802. During the 1830s whaler hunters lived on the coast during the whaling season.\nEarly settlement.\nFarmers began to settle along the coast during the 1840s. In 1846 the town was surveyed and laid out, and the first land sale was held in 1847."}
{"id": "43238", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43238", "title": "Whitney Sloan", "text": "Whitney Adela Sloan (born August 21, 1988) is an English actress. She is from London, England. Perhaps her most notable role is in a recent Disney made movie, \"Go Figure\"."}
{"id": "43239", "revid": "7844879", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43239", "title": "Macedonia", "text": "Macedonia or Macedonian may refer to:"}
{"id": "43240", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43240", "title": "Rock\u2013paper\u2013scissors", "text": "Rock, paper, scissors (RPS) is a two-person hand game. It is often used as a selection method in a similar way to coin flipping or drawing straws to randomly select a person for some purpose. However, unlike truly random selections, it can be played with skill if the game extends over many sessions, as a player can often recognize and exploit the non-random behavior of an opponent.\nSportsmen often use RPS (both officially and unofficially, in place of a coin toss) to decide on opening plays. Similarly, uncertain calls, or even the whole game in case of rain, may be so decided. It is also often used as a method for creating appropriately non-biased random results in live action role-playing games, as it requires no equipment. It is also used in some gambling sites as a form of novelty betting.\nThe exact name of the game can vary, with the three components appearing in a different order, or with \"stone\" in place of \"rock\". Non-English speakers may know the game by their local words for \"rock, paper, scissors\", although it is also known as Janken or Yakyuken in Japan, Kawi Bawi Bo in Korea, Pierre-Papier-Ciseaux in France, Ca-Chi-Pun in Chile, and in South Africa as Ching-Chong-Cha, the words used in the 'count'.\nThe players both count aloud to three, or speak the name of the game (e.g. \"Rock! Paper! Scissors!\" or \"Reaux! Sham! Beaux!\"), each time raising one hand in a fist and swinging it down on the count. On the third count, or on a further beat after the third count (saying \"shoot\"), the players change their hands into one of three gestures, which they then \"throw\" by extending it towards their opponent.\nRock is represented by a closed fist. \nPaper is represented by an open hand. \nScissors is represented by the index and middle fingers extended. \nThe objective is to select a gesture which defeats that of the opponent. Gestures are resolved as follows:\nRock blunts/smashes scissors; rock wins. \nPaper covers rock; paper wins. \nScissors cut paper; scissors wins. \nIn terms of logic, this type of game is intransitive.\nIf both players choose the same gesture, the game is tied and played again.\nIn some variations of the game, the winner of each round \"uses\" the weapon on the opponent's weapon, to demonstrate that they have won.\nRPS is frequently played in a \"best two out of three\" match, and tournament players often prepare sequences of three gestures ahead of time.\nPopularity.\nThe game is famous in Japan, China, and the United States."}
{"id": "43244", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43244", "title": "Darwin", "text": "Darwin can mean:"}
{"id": "43248", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43248", "title": "Katie Leung", "text": "Katie Liu Leung (born 8 August 1987) is a Scottish actress. She is most famous for her roles as Cho Chang in the Harry Potter series. She was born in Motherwell, Scotland.\nHer parents, Peter and Kar Wai Li Leung, are Chinese immigrants. After her parents got divorced, she lived with her father in a \u00a3400,000 house in Motherwell, Scotland. Her two brothers and a younger sister, also live with her. Her father owns a restaurant and a fast food business in Motherwell. Leung went to school at Hamilton College, a Scottish private school in Glasgow. She speaks fluent Cantonese and some Mandarin.\nLeung has been named as Scotland's most stylish female and as the hottest Scotswoman by \"The Scotsman\". She has also been in \"Teen Vogue\" and in \"Evening Standard\"."}
{"id": "43253", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43253", "title": "Psycho (movie)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43262", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43262", "title": "Film noir", "text": "Film noir is a term used to describe crime drama movies from Hollywood that are often focused on sex, crime, and corruption. \nFilm noir movies were mostly made from the early 1940s to the late 1950s in the United States, and they were usually filmed in black-and-white. The term \"film noir\" comes from the French term for \"black film\" or \"dark film\". Film noir movies include many different genres of movies, such as gangster movies, police movies, and detective movies. \nFilm noir movies were often filmed so that there were many dark shadows in the movie, even on characters' faces. The Hollywood film noir movies were influenced by German film directors such as Fritz Lang, who used dramatic lighting techniques. Another influence on film noir movies was 1930s French books or movies about heroes who would die at the end of the story or stories with sad endings. Film noir movies were also influenced by crime fiction, such as the detective and crime stories by Dashiell Hammett, James M. Cain, and Raymond Chandler.\nExamples of film noir movies and actors.\nSome important film noir movies are: \"Stranger on the Third Floor\" (1940); \"The Maltese Falcon\" (1941) \"Double Indemnity\" (1944) \"The Big Sleep\" (1946) \"The Postman Always Rings Twice\" (1946); \"Key Largo\" (1948);\"Kiss Me Deadly\" (1955), and \"Touch of Evil\" (1958). \nThe important actors from Hollywood film noir movies were Robert Mitchum, Humphrey Bogart, and Peter Lorre.\nMovies from after the film noir period.\nThe film noir period was the 1940s and 1950s. Even in the years after the 1950s, some movies were made in the film noir style. In the 1960s and 1970s, there were movies like \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1962) and \"Chinatown\" (1974), which were influenced by the film noir movies from the 1950s.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s there were movies that were a bit like film noir movies, like \"Body Heat\" (1981), \"Basic Instinct\" (1992), \"Kill Me Again\" (1989),\" Red Rock West\" (1992), and \"Fargo\" (1996). In the 2000s, there are also movies that are like film noir movies in some ways. For example, there are films such as \"Memento\" (2000) and \"Sin City\" (2005). \nThere are also science fiction movies that look a bit like film noir movies because they look dark and they have a lead character who does some bad things, such as \"Soylent Green\" (1973); \"Blade Runner\" (1982), which starred Harrison Ford; and \"Minority Report\" (2002), which starred Tom Cruise.\nThings seen in film noir movies.\nFilm noir movies are often shot in cities at night, and the stories often take place in bars, nightclubs, gambling clubs, casinos, and cheap hotels. This makes film noir movies look very dark, because the scenes are shot at night, or inside dark places like a bar or hotel.\nFilm noir movie scenes often have a lot of shadows, such as the shadows of window frames, blinds, or stair banisters. There are also often dark shadows on the movie scenes, even on the faces of the actors. All of the shadows and darkness make the film noir movies feel mysterious and stressful. \nThe characters in film noir movies are often motivated by greed, jealousy, or revenge. The characters in film noir movies are often private detectives or police officers who are investigating crimes committed by bad criminals and gang members such as murder, gambling or prostitution. In film noir movies, there are often stories about robberies, heists, extortion of money (which is called \"blackmail\"), or murder.\nWatching film noir movies.\nIn film noir movies, even the heroes or lead characters are often bad or partly bad in some way. For example, the hero of a film noir movie may help an innocent man or woman who is being threatened by a criminal, or rescue a woman from a criminal gang. Yet the hero or lead character may also do bad things, such as commit crimes, hurt or threaten people, or tell lies. \nOften, the hero or lead character of a film noir film will be bitter, sad, lonely, or depressed, because of bad things that happened to them. The person watching the movie has to decide if they think that a hero who does both good and bad things is a good person or not. The stories from film noir movies can make the audience think about how people should act, or how people should make choices in their life. This is one of the things that people like about watching film noir movies.\nFilm noir movies are not happy movies. In happy movies, like romance movies, people fall in love, get married, and live happy lives. In film noir movies, sad things happen. A good man with a wife might need money for their rent, and borrow the money from a criminal gang leader, because the good man has no other way of getting the money. Then the bad gang leader might force the good man to do bad things to pay back the money. Maybe the bad gang leader will threaten to hurt the good man's wife. Then the good man has to decide between protecting his wife or doing a bad crime. \nPeople who watch film noir movies like to see stories about people who have to make hard choices, or people whose lives have sad things happen in them. Real life is not a romantic comedy; people often have to make hard choices or have sad things happen.\nBooks about film noir.\nRobert Ottoson wrote a book in 1981 about film noir called \"A Reference Guide to the American Film Noir: 1940\u20131958\"."}
{"id": "43263", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43263", "title": "Jazz fusion", "text": "Jazz fusion (or \"jazz-rock fusion\" or fusion) is a genre or style of music. Jazz fusion mixes jazz with rock. Some jazz fusion also uses funk, rhythm and blues and world music.\nJazz fusion is usually played with instruments, without singing. The songs are often longer than those in pop music. A jazz fusion song could be five to ten minutes long. A pop song is usually about three minutes long. Also, jazz fusion songs have a long solo played by instruments. Frank Zappa, for example, had long guitar solos in his music, which was of the jazz fusion genre. In jazz fusion, solos are improvised, or made up as they are played, during a performance.\nJazz fusion music is not heard much on the radio in the United States or Canada. In Europe, it is more popular on radio stations.\nHistory.\nJazz fusion began in the late 1960s in the United States. In the late 1960s jazz musicians such as Miles Davis and a band called The Tony Williams Lifetime began using electric instruments such as electric bass and electric piano in their jazz music. As well, jazz musicians began adding rhythms or beats from soul music, rhythm and blues, and rock music into their jazz music. Two important jazz fusion albums are \"In a Silent Way\" and \"Bitches Brew.\"\nIn the 1970s, more people began playing jazz fusion. It became more popular, so more people began listening to jazz fusion and going to jazz fusion concerts. In the 1970s, jazz musicians such as Herbie Hancock, Joe Zawinul, Jan Hammer and Chick Corea began using electronic synthesizers in their songs.\nIn the early 1980s, a new style of jazz fusion called \"pop fusion\" began being played. This new style of pop fusion was softer and slower than fusion from the early 1970s. Pop fusion was played a lot more on the radio than the fusion from the early 1970s. Pop fusion musicians include Lee Ritenour, Al Jarreau, Kenny G, Bob James and David Sanborn.\nSteve Vai was an icon of jazz fusion in the 1980s and played extensive guitar based jazz fusion instrumentals."}
{"id": "43264", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43264", "title": "Pyscho", "text": ""}
{"id": "43266", "revid": "1035196", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43266", "title": "Stadio Olimpico", "text": "Stadio Olimpico is a sports stadium in Rome, Italy."}
{"id": "43267", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43267", "title": "Insulation", "text": "Insulation might mean:"}
{"id": "43270", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43270", "title": "Arc de Triomphe", "text": "The Arc de Triomphe (meaning \"arch of victory)\", at the centre of the place de l'\u00c9toile and the western end of the Champs-Elys\u00e9es, is a very famous monument in Paris.\nEmperor Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte commissioned it in 1806 after victory in the Battle of Austerlitz. It is a large arch, but it is not possible to drive underneath it. Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Chalgrin designed it, and it has roughly 300 steps that lead to the top. It has four main sculptures and six reliefs. Just beneath the vault of the arch, there is the tomb of the unknown soldier. The names of French generals and battles are engraved on the walls.\n "}
{"id": "43271", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43271", "title": "Show", "text": "Show can mean different things:"}
{"id": "43273", "revid": "1143240", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43273", "title": "Traffic light", "text": "Traffic lights (or traffic signals) are lights used to control the movement of traffic. They are placed at road intersections and crossings. The different colors of lights tell drivers what to do.\nLight cycles.\nTraffic lights change their colors in the same order every time. In most English-speaking countries, traffic lights usually change in this order:\n was credited with the invention of the electric traffic light in 1912 in Salt Lake City, Utah. Garrett Morgan, an African-American inventor, also developed a traffic signaling system, and was one of the first people to get a patent for a traffic light.\nWilliam Potts, a police officer, invented the first traffic light with three colors."}
{"id": "43274", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43274", "title": "Railway signal", "text": "A railway signal or just signal is a mechanical or electrical machine that gives train drivers or engineers information about the line ahead. These traffic signals say whether the train must stop or may continue and what speed the train may go.\nIn Britain, modern signalling uses a system similar to road traffic lights. The signals are coloured lights mounted on a pole. A red signal means 'do not go further'. A yellow signal gives a warning to the driver that the next signal is showing a red. Some signals can show two yellow lights, known as a \"double yellow\" and are warnings to the driver that the next signal is showing a yellow. A green signal means 'you can continue'.\nOn older lines semaphore signals are still used. These are poles with a coloured bar at the top, which can be moved so that it is either horizontal, or at an angle. When a red bar is horizontal this means that the train must stop, and when it is pointing diagonally up or down it means that it's safe for the driver to continue. There are also signals with yellow bars which give warnings in the same way as yellow lights on newer signals."}
{"id": "43278", "revid": "1081670", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43278", "title": "Maitland, New South Wales", "text": "Maitland is a city in New South Wales, Australia. The city is on the Hunter River. Maitland is 200 km north of Sydney and 30 km northwest of Newcastle. Maitland is sometimes called the largest city that is not on the sea in New South Wales. The Maitland Gaol, which closed in 1998, is now a tourist attraction."}
{"id": "43279", "revid": "7812660", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43279", "title": "Benalla, Victoria", "text": "Benalla is a city in Victoria, Australia. In 2016, 9,298 people lived there. Benalla is on the Hume Highway between Sydney and Melbourne. The town is on the Broken River, which often floods. Benalla has a station on the main railway line between Sydney and Melbourne. Benalla is widely known for it's annual 'Wall to Wall' festival which sees many tourists through the area to visit the wall art. \nHistory.\nMajor Thomas Mitchell went through this area on his way back to Sydney in 1836. One of the men with him, a convict named James Taylor, was drowned while trying to cross the Broken River. After Mitchell many farmers arrived with sheep to make new farms. The Reverend Joseph Docker (1793 - 1865) started a farm called \"Benalta\" in 1838 but later settled on the run Bontherambo, near Wangaratta. The name came from the Taungurung Australian aboriginal word meaning \"musk duck\". The name was later changed to Benalla.\nSeven men, working for farmers George and William Faithfull, were killed by the aborigines at Winding Swamp on April 11 1838. The police under Captain Lonsdale killed many Taungurung people as punishment. Their ears were cut off and taken back to Melbourne as a trophy (prize).\nThe town of Benalla was surveyed in 1846.\nBotanical gardens.\nThe Benalla Botanical Gardens were started in 1886. They cover an area of . The gardens are well known for their collection of roses. The gardens also have three \"Ulmus x viminalis\", an elm tree hybrid. These trees are listed on the Significant Tree Register of the National Trust. They are the only known examples of the hybrid elm in Australia."}
{"id": "43281", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43281", "title": "Grafton, New South Wales", "text": "Grafton is a small city on the northern coast of New South Wales, Australia. It is on the Clarence River and is 640 kilometres north of Sydney. The town is famous for its double-decker road/railway bridge."}
{"id": "43284", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43284", "title": "Drown", "text": ""}
{"id": "43293", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43293", "title": "Zupaysaurus", "text": "Zupaysaurus was a dinosaur that lived in South America 213 million years ago, during the Upper Triassic period. It was about 5 meters (15 feet) long. A dinosaur very similar to it, \"Dracovenator\", lived in South Africa at the same time. \nDuring the Triassic period, all the continents were connected to form the supercontinent of Pangaea, and animals could migrate freely between them. Zupaysaurus was a carnivore. "}
{"id": "43295", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43295", "title": "Zephyrosaurus", "text": "Zephyrosaurus was a small dinosaur. It was a relative of Hypsilophodon. It lived 132 million years ago, in the western part of what is now North America. It was 6\u00a0ft (2 metres) long and 3\u00a0ft (1 metre) high.\nThe remains are bones from various parts of the body. It had a steep face, a raised knob on the upper jaw, and a larger knob on the cheekbone. Some of the bones may have allowed movement within the skull (cranial kinesis) as well. Like other hypsilophodonts, it had beak teeth."}
{"id": "43296", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43296", "title": "Hypsilophodon", "text": "Hypsilophodon was a small, fast-running, plant-eating dinosaur. It lived 125 million years ago, was 2.3 metres long (7/8 feet), including tail, and weighed about the same as a man.\nIt was originally thought to be a young \"Iguanodon\" which could climb trees. Later it was realised to be a different species, and to be a running dinosaur, not adapted for climbing.\nPalaeobiology.\nLike most small dinosaurs, \"Hypsilophodon\" was bipedal and ran on two legs. Its entire body was built for running; a light-weight, low, aerodynamic posture, long legs and stiff tail for balance. All this would have allowed it to travel remarkably fast for its size.\n\"Hypsilophodon\" fed on low-growing vegetation, most likely preferring young shoots and roots in the manner of modern deer. The structure of its skull, with the teeth set far back into the jaw, strongly suggests that it had cheeks, an advanced feature that would have facilitated the chewing of food. There were twenty-eight to thirty ridged teeth in the animal's jaw which, due to their alternate arrangement, appear to have been self-sharpening. As in almost all dinosaurs and certainly all the ornithischians, the teeth were continuously replaced.\nThe level of parental care in this dinosaur has not been defined, although a neatly-arranged nest has been found, suggesting that some care was taken before hatching. Fossils of large groups have been found, so it is likely that the animals moved in herds. For these reasons, the hypsilophodonts, particularly \"Hypsilophodon\", have often been referred to as the \"deer of the Mesozoic\".\nDespite living in the Cretaceous, \"Hypsilophodon\" had a number of primitive, or basal, features. For example, there were five fingers on each 'hand' and four on each foot. Most dinosaurs had fewer digits by the Cretaceous period. Also, although it had a beak, \"Hypsilophodon\" still had pointed triangular teeth in the front of the jaw. Most herbivorous dinosaurs had, by this stage, lost the front teeth altogether (although there is some debate as to whether these teeth may have had a specialized function in \"Hypsilophodon\").\nThe group Hypsilophodontidae remained the same from the Upper Jurassic to the end of the Cretaceous. It is possible that this was because the animals were almost perfectly adapted to their lifestyle, therefore selective pressure, it is assumed, was low.\nHypsilophodontidae.\nThe family named after \"Hysilophodon\" has these genera:"}
{"id": "43298", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43298", "title": "Dryosaurus", "text": "Dryosaurus was a small plant-eating ornithopod dinosaur that lived in forests of western North America around 150 million years ago.\nIts family, the Dryosauridae, were precursors (ancestors) of the Iguanodons, and lived from the Middle Jurassic to the Lower Cretaceous."}
{"id": "43299", "revid": "7835241", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43299", "title": "Iguanodon", "text": "Iguanodon \"is a genus of ornithopod dinosaur from the Lower Cretaceous period in Europe, North America, Africa and Asia. It lived 125/126 million years ago (mya).\"\nDiscovered in 1822 and described three years later by English geologist Gideon Mantell, \"Iguanodon\" was the second dinosaur formally named, after \"Megalosaurus\". Together with \"Megalosaurus\" and \"Hylaeosaurus\", it was one of the three genera originally used to define Dinosauria.\nA large, bulky herbivore, \"Iguanodon\" is thought by some to be in the same family as the duck-billed hadrosaurs. The taxonomy of the genus continues to be a topic of study as new species are named or long-standing ones reassigned to other genera.\nScientific understanding of \"Iguanodon\" has evolved over time. New information is got from the fossils. Researchers have made informed hypotheses about the living animal, including feeding, movement, and social behaviour. As one of the first scientifically known dinosaurs, \"Iguanodon\" has a small but notable place in the public's perception of dinosaurs. Its artistic representation changed after new interpretations of its remains.\nSpecies.\nThere are at least two species recognised:\nPosture and movement.\nBecause its front limbs were shorter than the hindlimbs, Mantell guessed it could move on two legs, as opposed to Owen, who thought it was quadrupedal. As it happens, it probably used both modes. Slow walking would be done on all fours, and faster running on the hind legs. Either way, the position of the body would be more horizontal than upright, with the tail held above the ground by its ossified (bony) ligaments (they can be clearly seen on the skeleton). It would defend itself against predators on its hind legs, using its strong front arms and dagger-like thumbs as weapons.\nEating.\nThe teeth were close-set grinding teeth suitable for a browser. it is believed that, as with most other ornithischians, \"Iguanodon\" had some sort of cheek-like structure, muscular or non-muscular, to keep food in the mouth."}
{"id": "43300", "revid": "7501045", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43300", "title": "Xylem", "text": "Xylem is a tissue in vascular plants. Its cells have thick, hard walls. Xylem tissue dies soon after it is formed and is the wood in the middle of a tree. The dead cells are like pipes, hollow and rigid.\nXylem is one of two tissues in the plant which transport substances that plants need to live. Substances that xylem transports include water and minerals obtained through the plant's roots, as xylem runs from the roots to the stems and leaves. The other transport tissue is the phloem, which transports energy in the form of sugar (as well as any other chemicals) from the leaves to the rest of the plant.\nXylem cells are present in all parts of a plant, in stems, roots, and leaves. Water is carried against gravity by the negative pressure that builds up through the process of transpiration, which is the evaporation of moisture in leaves.\nXylem consists of four types of cells:\nMost of these cells are dead cells and have thick walls."}
{"id": "43301", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43301", "title": "Allosaurus", "text": "Allosaurus was a large theropod dinosaur from the Jurassic period, a predatory carnivore.\n\"Allosaurus\" averaged 8.5 metres (28\u00a0ft) in length, though some remains suggest it could reach over 12 meters (39\u00a0ft). Its three-fingered forelimbs were smaller than its large hind legs, and the body was balanced by a long, heavy tail. It weighed 2/3 tons.\nIt is the most common large predator found in the Morrison Formation of North America. This formation was laid down 155 to 145 million years ago, in the Jurassic.\n\"Allosaurus\" was at the top of the food chain. It probably preyed on large herbivorous dinosaurs and perhaps even other predators (e.g. \"Ceratosaurus\"). Potential prey included ornithopods, stegosaurs, and sauropods.\nSome paleontologists think \"Allosaurus\" had cooperative behavior, and hunted in packs. Others believe they may have been aggressive toward each other.\nGroups have been found together in the fossil record. This might be evidence of pack behavior, or just the result of lone individuals feeding on the same carcass.\nRemains of many individuals have been found, including some which are almost complete. Over sixty-nine individuals from one species have been found.\nFeeding.\nSauropods, live or dead, seem to be likely candidates as prey. Sauropod bones with holes fitting allosaur teeth, and the presence of shed allosaur teeth with sauropod bones have been found.\nThere is dramatic evidence for allosaur attacks on \"Stegosaurus\". An \"Allosaurus\" tail vertebra has been found with a partially healed puncture which fits a \"Stegosaurus\" tail spike. Also, there is a \"Stegosaurus\" neck plate with a U-shaped wound that correlates well with an \"Allosaurus\" snout.\n\"Allosaurus\" was probably not a predator of fully grown sauropods, unless it hunted in packs. It had a modestly sized skull and relatively small teeth, and was greatly outweighed by adult sauropods. Another possibility is that it preferred to hunt juveniles instead of fully grown adults.\nResearchers have made other suggestions. Robert T. Bakker compared the short teeth to serrations on a saw. This saw-like cutting edge runs the length of the upper jaw, and could have been driven into prey. This type of jaw would permit slashing attacks against much larger prey, with the goal of weakening the victim.\nAnother study showed the skull was very strong but had a relatively small bite force. The authors suggested that \"Allosaurus\" used its skull like a hatchet against prey, attacking open-mouthed, slashing flesh with its teeth, and tearing it away without splintering bones.\nThey suggested that different strategies could be used against different prey. The skull was light enough to allow attacks on smaller and more agile ornithopods, but strong enough for high-impact ambush attacks against larger prey like stegosaurs and sauropods.\nTheir ideas were challenged by other researchers, who found no modern examples of a hatchet attack. They thought it more likely that the skull was strong to absorb stresses from struggling prey.\nThe original authors noted that \"Allosaurus\" itself has no modern equivalent, so the absence of a modern 'hatchet attacker' was not significant. They thought the tooth row was well-suited to such an attack, and that articulations (joints) in the skull helped to lessen stress.\nAnother possibility for handling large prey is that theropods like \"Allosaurus\" were 'flesh grazers' which could take bites of flesh out of living sauropods, sufficient to sustain the predator so it did not need to kill the prey outright. This strategy might have allowed the prey to recover and be fed upon again later. \nAnother idea is that ornithopods, the most common available prey, could be subdued by \"Allosaurus\" grasping the prey with their forelimbs, and then making bites on the throat to crush the trachea. The forelimbs were strong and capable of restraining prey, and the articulation of the claws suggests that they could have been used to hook things.\nThe shape of the \"Allosaurus\" skull limited binocular vision to 20\u00b0 of width, slightly less than that of modern crocodilians. As with crocodiles, this may have been enough to judge prey distance and time attacks. The similar width of their field of view suggests that allosaurs, like modern crocodiles, were ambush hunters.\nFinally, the top speed of \"Allosaurus\" has been estimated at 30 to 55\u00a0kilometers per hour (19 to 34\u00a0miles per hour).\nCleveland-Lloyd discoveries.\nThe fossil site known as the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Emery County, Utah was known in 1927, but major operations did not begin there until 1960. An effort from nearly 40\u00a0institutions got thousands of bones between 1960 and 1965. The quarry is notable for the many \"Allosaurus\" remains, the condition of the specimens, and our ignorance of its ancient origin. It is estimated that the remains of at least 46\u00a0\"A. fragilis\" have been found there, out of at least 73\u00a0dinosaurs. The fossils found there are disarticulated (separate) and well-mixed.\nSuggestions as to how it arose include animals getting stuck in a bog, to becoming trapped in deep mud, to falling victim to drought-induced mortality around a waterhole, to getting trapped in a spring-fed pond or seep. Regardless of the cause, the great quantity of well-preserved \"Allosaurus\" remains means the animal is one of the best-known theropods. Individuals of almost all ages and sizes are found, from less than 1\u00a0meter (3.3\u00a0ft) to 12\u00a0meters (39\u00a0ft) long.\nSpecies.\nThere are five recognised species of \"Allosaurus\": \nMedia.\n\"Allosaurus\", like \"Tyrannosaurus\", has come to represent the quintessential large, carnivorous dinosaur in popular culture.\nIt is a common dinosaur in museums. A number of museums cooperated in excavations at the Cleveland Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry. By 1976, museums in eight countries on three continents had Cleveland-Lloyd allosaur material or casts. \"Allosaurus\" is the official 'state fossil' of Utah.\n\"Allosaurus\" is top predator in both Arthur Conan Doyle's 1912 novel, \"The Lost World\", and its 1925 film adaptation, the first full-length motion picture to feature dinosaurs.\n\"Allosaurus\" was used as the starring dinosaur of the 1956 film \"The Beast of Hollow Mountain\", and the 1969 film \"The Valley of Gwangi\". Gwangi is billed as an \"Allosaurus\", though Ray Harryhausen based his model for the creature on Charles R. Knight's depiction of a \"Tyrannosaurus\". \"Allosaurus\" appeared in the second episode of the 1999 BBC television series \"Walking with Dinosaurs\" and the follow-up special \"The Ballad of Big Al\", which speculated on the life of the 'Big Al' specimen, as revealed by the numerous injuries and pathologies in its skeleton."}
{"id": "43303", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43303", "title": "Ceratosaurus", "text": "Ceratosaurus was a predatory dinosaur from the Upper Jurassic period, 156 to 145 million years ago. It had a large horn on its nose, and a pair of smaller horns in front of its eyes. Uniquely among theropods, \"Ceratosaurus\" had armor, in the form of small osteoderms running down the middle of its back."}
{"id": "43304", "revid": "7775957", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43304", "title": "Carnotaurus", "text": "Carnotaurus was a predatory dinosaur that lived 70 million years ago. It was a large theropod which lived in South America during the Upper Cretaceous between about 72 and 70 million years ago. Although there is only one well-preserved skeleton, it is one of the best-understood theropods from the southern hemisphere. The skeleton, found in 1984, was uncovered in the Chubut Province of Argentina. \n\"Carnotaurus\" is a member of the Abelisauridae, a group of large theropods. The abelisaurids were a family of large theropods which lived only in the ancient southern supercontinent Gondwana. They were the dominant predators of the later Cretaceous of Gondwana. They occupied the ecological niche filled by the tyrannosaurids in the northern continents. \nDescription.\n\"Carnotaurus\" was a lightly built, bipedal predator, in length and at least in weight. As a theropod, \"Carnotaurus\" was highly specialized and distinctive. It had thick horns above the eyes, a feature not seen in other carnivorous dinosaurs, and a very deep skull sitting on a muscular neck. Also, it had small, vestigial forelimbs, smaller even than those of \"Tyrannosaurus\". \nThe remains include skin impressions showing a mosaic of small, non-overlapping scales about 5\u00a0mm in diameter. The mosaic was interrupted by large bumps that lined the sides of the animal, and there are no hints of feathers.\nThe distinctive horns and muscular neck may have been used in fighting rivals of its own species. Rivals may have fought with quick head blows, by slow pushes with the upper sides of their skulls, or by ramming each other head-on, using their horns as shock absorbers. The feeding habits of \"Carnotaurus\" remain unclear: some studies suggest the animal was able to hunt down very large prey such as sauropods, while other studies find it preyed mainly on relatively small animals. \"Carnotaurus\" was well adapted for running and was possibly one of the fastest large theropods.\nPalaeoecology.\nThe animal lived in an environment of estuaries, tidal flats or coastal plains. The climate would have been seasonal with both dry and humid periods. The most common vertebrates collected include lungfish, turtles, crocodiles, plesiosaurs, dinosaurs, lizards, snakes and mammals. Turtles are represented by at least five taxa. In 2011, the discovery of a new enantiornithine bird from the La Colonia Formation was announced.\nMedia.\nIt appears in the movie \"Dinosaur\" (2000), when two Carnotaurus were fighting with Iguanodon, Pachyrhinosaurus and other species. And in \"\" (2018), when fighting a Sinoceratops and gets taken down by the iconic \"Rexy\" the Tyrannosaurus rex. Later on in the movie, when it escapes the \"Lockwood Manor\" and in Michael Crichton's book \"The Lost World\" (1995)"}
{"id": "43306", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43306", "title": "Coelophysis", "text": "Coelophysis was a small fast running carnivorous dinosaur. It is one of the earliest known genera of dinosaur. \"Coelophysis\" was found in Upper Triassic strata dated to about 200 million years ago (mya). It lived in what is now the southwestern United States. Similar dinosaurs are found all over the world at that time.\n\"Coelophysis\" walked on two legs (as did all theropods). It was no more than about three feet (1 meter) tall at the hips but because of a long tail could be almost 10 feet (3 meters) long. There is some evidence that these animals hunted in packs, from the large numbers found together at the Ghost Ranch fossil site in New Mexico.\nLifestyle.\nSexual dimorphism.\nTwo different sizes of this species have been found in the fossil record. At first paleontologists thought that they were two different species, but most now think that this is because \"Coelophysis\" males were larger than the females. This trait, known as sexual dimorphism, is often seen today in many animal species.\nVision.\n\"Coelophysis\" had a long narrow head (approximately ), with large, forward-facing eyes that afforded it stereoscopic vision and as a result excellent depth perception. The eyes were supported by bony rings (\"sclerotic\" rings). The complete sclerotic ring of a juvenile \"Coelophysis bauri\" was compared to those of reptiles and birds. Evidently \"Coelophysis\" was a daytime predator which hunted by sight. The study found that its vision was superior to that of most lizards, and ranked with that of modern birds of prey.\nConditions of find.\nFor a while, it was thought that \"Coelophysis\" were cannibalistic, because what looked like \"Coelophysis\" babies were seen in the stomach of an adult \"Coelophysis\". However, these specimens were misinterpreted. Several specimens of \"juvenile coelophysids\" were actually small crurotarsan reptiles such as \"Hesperosuchus\". In some cases bigger individuals were crushed on top of smaller ones. There is no longer any evidence to support cannibalistic behavior in \"Coelophysis\".\nHistory of its discovery.\nEdward Drinker Cope first named \"Coelophysis\" in 1889. This was during the \"Bone Wars\" with Othniel Charles Marsh. An amateur fossil collector, David Baldwin, found the first remains of the dinosaur in 1881. The type species, \"C. bauri\" was named after him. These first finds were too poorly preserved to give a complete picture of the new dinosaur.\nIn 1947, a substantial 'graveyard' of \"Coelophysis\" fossils was found in New Mexico, at Ghost Ranch, close to the original find. So many fossils together were probably the result of a flash flood, which swept away a large number of \"Coelophysis\" and buried them quickly and simultaneously. It seems such flooding was commonplace at the time. The Petrified Forest of nearby Arizona was caused by a log jam of tree trunks caught in a flood.\nThe Ghost Ranch specimens were numerous, with many well-preserved specimens. Since the Ghost Ranch specimens were discovered, more skeletons have been found in Arizona, New Mexico and an as-yet unconfirmed specimen from Utah, including both adults and juveniles. The deposits where \"Coelophysis\" was discovered date from the late Triassic, bur similar specimens have been found in the Lower Jurassic elsewhere in the world.\n\"Coelophysis\" is the state fossil of New Mexico."}
{"id": "43307", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43307", "title": "Dilophosaurus", "text": "Dilophosaurus (meaning 'double-crested lizard') was a medium-large dinosaur from 190 million years ago.\n\"Dilophosaurus\" has been examined several times over the years and has been put into no less than nine different theropod groups. It may be related to the smaller \"Coelophysis\". Specific details of its life-style are few. Some of its fossils were found in terrain which was a low-lying slow-moving river system at the time. The animal was obviously a carnivore.\n\"Dilophosaurus\" was shown in the movie \"When Dinosaurs Roamed America\" scaring off a pack of \"Megapnosaurus\" and eating an \"Anchisaurus\"."}
{"id": "43308", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43308", "title": "SimCity 4", "text": "SimCity 4 is the fourth sequel to the SimCity computer game. It was created by Maxis and published by Electronic Arts.\nNew Features.\nThe main new feature in this game is the addition of 'God Mode'. This is one of the three elements of gameplay. Players can add mountains, lakes, rivers and canyons to their landscape.\nAnother feature is \"MySims\" mode, a mode that lets players import their Sims from the game The Sims and add them into their city. This lets players see what they are thinking.\nCities are grouped into regions, which allow different cities in the same region to be connected. They can be connected by road or train, and cities could share water. Some regions come with the game, but you can create your own.\nRCI.\nRCI stands for residential (housing), commercial, and industry demand. The higher the demand, the faster the city grows. No demand or negative demand causes buildings to be empty and run down. \nCity Growth.\nBig buildings show up when you have high density zones. The amount of people living in the city changes the amount of skyscrapers built in the city. Skyscrapers can be built when residential population reaches 30,000, and when commercial population reaches 45,000."}
{"id": "43311", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43311", "title": "Elasmosaurus", "text": "Elasmosaurus was a 46 foot long swimming reptile that lived in the North American Inland Sea. It was a plesiosaur. \nIt was first discovered in 1868 by a scientist named Edward Drinker Cope who accidentally put the head on the tail. It had 71 cervical vertebrae. \nIt was suggested by D.M.S. Watson that their method was as surface swimmers, mostly eating with their head above water, darting down to snatch smaller fish which were feeding on plankton. It is hard to see the benefit of a long neck under water. Aquatic mammals operating under water all have a streamlined torpedo-shape, as did pliosaurs and ichthyosaurs. All the longer-necked families were, from the setting of the teeth and jaws, eaters of small fish. The large number of neck vertebrae is probably linked to the modest degree of flexibility between adjacent vertebrae."}
{"id": "43314", "revid": "659510", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43314", "title": "Waffen-SS", "text": "The Waffen-SS was part of the Schutzstaffel (SS). \"Waffen-SS\" means \"armed SS\" in German. The Waffen-SS was a paramilitary organization within the SS.\nThe divisions of the Waffen-SS were made of specially trained soldiers. Their original job was to protect higher-ranking people in the SS and the Nazi Party. Together with the \"Sturmabteilung\"\u00a0(\"Storm Battalion,\" or SA), they were used as a police force. The Waffen-SS was officially an extra police force on the streets.\nIn 1937, some soldiers were reorganized. Nazi leaders gave some SS members the job of guarding and running concentration camps (and, later, death camps). These soldiers were moved from the Waffen-SS to the \"SS-Totenkopfverb\u00e4nde\".\nIn some of the concentration camps, like Auschwitz and Buchenwald, doctors of the Waffen-SS did experiments on humans.\nHeinrich Himmler led the SS from 1929 until Nazi Germany lost World War II in 1945. After World War II, the SS were found guilty of crimes against humanity, and the SS was made illegal.\nDivisions of the Waffen-SS.\nThe Waffen-SS was grouped into divisions, as follows:\nThe differences to the normal army units were as follows:\nBritish SS.\nOne of the strangest SS units was the British Free Corps. It was a unit of the Waffen SS during World War II. The unit was made of about 27 prisoners of war from the British Empire. One British soldier who helped recruit other soldiers to join the unit was John Amery. After the war, he was sentenced to death for high treason, he was then executed.\nThe troops after 1945.\nAfter the end of the war, all soldiers were dismissed from the SS.\nIn 1951, the \"Hilfsgemeinschaft auf Gegenseitigkeit der ehemaligen Angeh\u00f6rigen der Waffen-SS\" was founded in Germany. This translates to \"Mutual support organisation of former members of the Waffen-SS'.\" In English, it is better known as \"HIAG.\" The group wanted soldiers who were in the Waffen-SS to be treated the same as soldiers of the Wehrmacht (the regular German Army).\nThe group also publishes a magazine. The magazine tries to send the message that the Waffen-SS were just normal soldiers. Sometimes, there are also revisionist articles in it."}
{"id": "43317", "revid": "6882054", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43317", "title": "Pizzicato", "text": "Pizzicato means: playing a string instrument by plucking the strings (pulling a string with the finger and letting go quickly). Instruments such as the violin, viola, cello and double bass are normally played with a bow, but if the composer wants the player to pluck instead of bow, the word \u201cpizzicato\u201d or just \u201cpizz\u201d is written in the music. When the player has to play with the bow again the word \u201carco\u201d is written in the music (\u201carco\u201d is the Italian word for \u201cbow\u201d).\nHow to play pizzicato.\nWhen instruments of the violin family are played pizzicato the player usually plucks the string with the index finger (pointing finger) of the right hand somewhere over the fingerboard. Bassists typically use the index and middle finger. Sometimes the player may rest the thumb on the edge of the fingerboard to keep the hand steady. Sometimes more fingers can be used for particularly fast pizzicato sections. Cellists and double bass players can use the thumb for plucking, especially for playing chords.\nIt is also possible to play pizzicato with the left hand (the hand which is normally doing the fingering). It is not difficult to pluck an open string with the left hand. Stopped strings are harder, and the brilliant violinist and composer Niccol\u00f2 Paganini wrote some virtuoso pieces with extremely difficult left hand pizzicato. \nVery occasionally violinists may be asked to pluck their instruments holding them down in their laps. This is normally when they are deliberately imitating a guitar.\nVery often players have to change very quickly from bowing to plucking and back again. It is easy to play a bowed note and then immediately a plucked note if the bowed note finished near the heel of the bow (the end where the bow is held). If the bowed note finishes near the tip the player needs a moment to get the hand ready to pluck. It can take a little more time to go back to bowing again because the player has to get the bow back into playing position.\nIf there is a long pizzicato section then it is more comfortable to put the bow down instead of holding it in the right hand all the time. This is fine so long as the player has time to pick the bow up again when it goes back to arco.\nThe sound of pizzicato.\nPizzicato notes sound short and detached (staccato). The player can get different sounds by plucking in different parts of the string. High notes sound very short and dry. Pizzicato notes on the double bass sound much more resonant (big and boomy). Double basses often play pizzicato to give extra rhythmic and harmonic support. For example: in a waltz the cellos and violas might be accompanying the tune with an \u201cum-cha-cha, um-cha-cha\u201d while the double basses just pluck on the \u201cum\u201d (the first beat of the bar). Double basses usually play pizzicato when playing with jazz groups.\nOne special effect can be made by pulling the string hard and letting it go so that it snaps against the fingerboard. Bart\u00f3k used this effect several times. This is not the same as jazz bass players who slap the strings at the end of a note (\u201cslap bass\u201d).\nPizzicato in music history.\nIn orchestras composers used pizzicato in the 17th century. Monteverdi used it in his opera \"Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda\". In the 19th century the Romantic composers often asked for pizzicato. Tchaikovsky\u2019s \"Symphony no 4\" has a whole scherzo movement for pizzicato strings. Johann Strauss wrote a \"Pizzicato Polka\" and in the 20th century Britten wrote a whole movement for pizzicato strings in his \"Simple Symphony\"."}
{"id": "43321", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43321", "title": "Movement (music)", "text": "Long pieces of classical music are often divided into movements. They are like different sections of the piece. Movements can be quite short, or extremely long. If you listen to a symphony it may often be divided into four movements. In the time of Haydn and Mozart the four movements were normally: a fast movement, a slow movement, a dance-like movement (minuet) and a fast movement to end the work.\nConcert programmes usually show how many movements there are in the work that is being performed. It may show this using Italian musical terms (e.g. \"Allegro\" meaning \"fast\", \"Presto\" meaning \"very fast\" or \"Andante\" meaning \"a gentle walking pace\"). Here is an example:\nRobert Schumann: Symphony no 4 in D minor op.120\nSometimes an orchestra will take a minute or two to retune their instruments, especially in a symphony by Mahler or Shostakovich where one movement might be as long as 25 minutes. At other times the conductor or performer will want to go almost straight on with hardly any break. Sometimes the composer shows that there should be no break at all between movements.\nAudiences in the olden days often used to clap between movements, but usually these days they wait until the end of the work to applaud.\nThe German word for \u201cmovement\u201d (in this musical sense) is \u201cSatz\u201d which really means \u201csentence\u201d. A movement is like a sentence: a collection of things that belong together to make sense. All the movements together are like several sentences: they tell the whole story."}
{"id": "43329", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43329", "title": "Port Hedland, Western Australia", "text": "Port Hedland is a city on the north coast of Western Australia. It has 13,000 people living there. It is the largest city in the Pilbara Region. It has a very large mineral port, because of one of the world's biggest iron deposits."}
{"id": "43333", "revid": "604871", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43333", "title": "Worms, Germany", "text": "Worms (pronounced /vo\u0250ms/) is a city in southwestern Germany in the federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate (Rheinland-Pfalz). It lies on the River Rhine. Worms is famous for its local Liebfraumilch wine. It is an industrial center, producing chemicals and metal goods. At the end of 2004, it had 85,829 inhabitants.\nAlong with Cologne and Trier, Worms is one the oldest cities in Germany. But, there is a disagreement which of the three is actually the oldest. The town is mentioned in the \"Nibelungenlied\", an old Germanic saga. The town was also very important because of Martin Luther who defended his case against the emperor Charles V in Worms.\nThe Cathedral of Saint Peter is a very large church in the town. It is one of only three Romanesque cathedrals in Germany. The other two are in Mainz and Speyer. The Worms cathedral is one of the most important Romanesque buildings in Germany. \n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "43338", "revid": "506417", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43338", "title": "Transistor", "text": "A transistor is an electronic component that can be used as part of an amplifier, or as a switch. It is made of a semiconductor material. Transistors are found in most electronic devices. The transistor was a major advancement after the triode tube, with using much less electricity, and lasting many years longer, to switch or amplify another electronic current.\nThe transistor can be used for a variety of different things including amplifiers and digital switches for computer microprocessors. Digital work mostly uses MOSFETs. Some transistors are individually packaged, mainly in order to handle high power. Most transistors are inside integrated circuits. \nHow they work.\nTransistors have three terminals: the gate, the drain, and the source (on a bipolar transistor, the wires can be called the emitter, the collector, and the base). When the source (or emitter) is connected to the negative terminal of the battery, and the drain (or collector) to the positive terminal, no electricity will flow in the circuit (if you have only a lamp in series with the transistor). But when power flows through the gate (or base), the transistor will allow electricity through. This is because when the gate is positively charged, the positive electrons will push other positive electrons in the transistor letting the negative electrons flow through. The transistor can also work when the gate is just positively charged, so it doesn't need to be touching the drain.\nVisualization.\nAn easy way to think of how a transistor works is as a hose with a sharp bend that stops the water from going through. The water is the electrons, and when you positively charge the gate, it unbends the hose, letting water flow.\nThe basic Darlington transistor circuit is formed from two bipolar transistors wired emitter to base so they act as one transistor. One of the transistors is connected so that it controls the current to the base of the other transistor. This means that you can control the same amount of current with a very small amount of current going into the base.\nUses.\nWhen the gate of a P-channel MOSFET is positively charged, electricity will flow through, this is useful for electronics that require a switch to be turned on, making it an electronic switch. This rivals the mechanical switch, which requires a constant force pressing on it.\nIn a MOSFET used as an amplifier, transistors take the flow of the drain and source, and since the source current is so much larger than the drain's current, it is common for the drain's current to rise to the value of the sources, amplifying it.\nMaterials.\nTransistors are made of semiconductor chemical elements, usually silicon, which belongs to the modern Group 14 (formerly Group IV) in the periodic table of elements. Germanium, another group-14 element, is used together with silicon in specialized transistors. Researchers are also studying transistors made from special forms of carbon. Transistors can be also made from compounds like gallium arsenide.\nHistory.\nThe transistor was not the first three terminal device. The triode served the same purpose of the transistor 50 years earlier. Vacuum tubes were important in household technology before transistors. Unfortunately, tubes were big and fragile, used a lot of power, and didn't last very long. The transistor solved these problems. \nThree physicists were credited with the invention of the transistor in 1947: Walter H. Brattain, John Bardeen, and William Shockley who contributed the most.\nImportance.\nThe transistor is a very important component today. If not for the transistor, devices such as cell phones and computers would be very different, or they might have not been invented at all. Transistors have been made very small (dozens of atoms wide) so that billions of them can be put into a small computer chip."}
{"id": "43339", "revid": "7617176", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43339", "title": "Sex toy", "text": "A sex toy is a device that helps humans get more pleasure when they have sex or when they masturbate. Sometimes these devices are also called Adult toy, or Marital aid. \"Marital aid\" can also apply to certain herbs or drugs that have such an effect. Herbs with such an effect are called aphrodisiac. \nTypes of sex toys include: "}
{"id": "43340", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43340", "title": "Adult toy", "text": ""}
{"id": "43342", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43342", "title": "Marital aid", "text": ""}
{"id": "43344", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43344", "title": "Compsognathus", "text": "Compsognathus was a small carnivorous theropod dinosaur, from the end of the Jurassic period, 144 million years ago. It was about a metre long, and ran on two legs, using its long tail to keep its balance.\n\"Compsognathus\" is known from two nearly complete specimens, one from Germany (89\u00a0cm 35\u00a0in long), and another from France (125\u00a0cm 49\u00a0in long). The German specimen was found in the Solnhofen limestone in Bavaria, over 150 years ago.\nThe larger French specimen (MNHN CNJ 79) was discovered in 1972 in the Portland limestone, near Nice in southeastern France. Although originally described as a separate species called \"Compsognathus corallestris\", others have since renamed it as another example of \"Compsognathus longipes\".\nIt is one of the few dinosaurs whose diet is known with certainty: the remains of small, agile lizards are preserved in the bellies of both specimens. Also it was once the smallest dino on earth but now that belongs to the \"Micropachycephalosaurus\"\nHistorical importance.\nThomas Henry Huxley (\"Darwin's bulldog\"), who was a comparative anatomist, made a study of it nearly 150 years ago. He compared the first fossil bird, \"Archaeopteryx\", with \"Compsognathus\". These two fossils were found in the same rocks: Solnhofen limestone in Bavaria, Germany. The strata come from the end of the Jurassic, about 144 million years ago. Huxley showed that the two were almost identical, except for the front limbs and feathers of \"Archaeopteryx\". He showed the basic affinity of birds and reptiles, which he united them under the title of \"Sauropsida\". Huxley concluded that birds evolved from small carnivorous dinosaurs.\nDiet.\nThe remains of a lizard in the German specimen's thoracic cavity show that \"Compsognathus\" preyed on small vertebrates. Marsh, who examined the specimen in 1881, thought that this small skeleton inside \"Compsognathus\" belly was an embryo, but in 1903, Franz Nopcsa concluded that it was a lizard. Ostrom identified the remains as belonging to a lizard of the genus \"Bavarisaurus\", which he concluded was a fast and agile runner owing to its long tail and limb proportions. This in turn led to the conclusion that its predators, \"Compsognathus\", must have had sharp vision and the ability to rapidly accelerate and outrun the lizard. The \"Bavarisaurus\" is in a single piece, indicating that the \"Compsognathus\" must have swallowed its prey whole. The French specimen's gastric contents consist of unidentified lizards or sphenodontids.\nSize.\n\"Comsognathus\" was once thought to be the smallest dinosaur. However, if we assume the smaller specimen was a juvenile, then there are other slightly smaller species. The smallest dinosaur is probably \"Anchiornis\"; other candidates are: \"Micropachycephalosaurus\"; \"Caenagnathasia\"; \"Microraptor\"; and \"Parvicursor\"."}
{"id": "43345", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43345", "title": "Micropachycephalosaurus", "text": "Micropachycephalosaurus, a tiny thick headed lizard, is a genus of ornithischian dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous. It was a herbivore, and lived in what is now Shandong, China. It was one of the smallest dinosaur ever discovered, just over a meter long, but with the longest name. Before it was discovered \"Compsognathus\" was the smallest known dinosaur.\nThe lack of the skull roof means the fossil cannot be placed at family level. It might or might not be a pachycephalosaur. Butler and Zhao therefore classified it as an indeterminate member of the Cerapoda. In 2011, cladistic analysis showed that \"Micropachycephalosaurus\" is a basal member of the Ceratopsia. In this context, basal does not mean 'ancestral'; the fossil is far too late for that. It means simply 'unspecialized', or lacking derived traits."}
{"id": "43346", "revid": "1153473", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43346", "title": "Velociraptor", "text": "Velociraptor is a term which refers to the fang of a number of small theropod dromaeosaur genera of the Upper Cretaceous, about 75\u201371 million years ago, and also a smaller relative of the famous \"Deinonychus\".\nIt was a slender, lightly built carnivore. It was about two meters long (nearly seven feet) and 0.62 meters tall at the hip.\n\"Velociraptor\" had one sickle-shaped claw on its foot which measured 6.5 centimeters along its length, and a smaller one on each hand. \"Velociraptor\" was warm blooded and had feathers.\nFossils from China suggest that the whole clade had similar traits.\nFossils of \"Velociraptor\" were first found in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia in 1922. In 1988, scientists from China found \"Velociraptor\" skeletons in northern China.\nA famous \"Velociraptor\", discovered in 1971, was found attacking a \"Protoceratops\" in a fossil from Mongolia.\nFeathers.\nIn September 2007 researchers found quill knobs on the forearm of a \"Velociraptor\" found in Mongolia. These bumps on bird wing bones show where feathers anchor, and their presence on \"Velociraptor\" indicate it too had feathers.\nTurner and colleagues interpreted the presence of feathers on \"Velociraptor\" as evidence that the ancestors of dromaeosaurids could fly, making \"Velociraptor\" and \"Deinonychus\" secondarily flightless. This idea has since been discarded; the unmodified forearms count against it. Therefore, the feathers in the ancestors of \"Velociraptor\" had another function. The feathers of the flightless \"Velociraptor\" may have been used for display, for covering their nests while brooding.\nThe majority view is that dinosaur feathers were primarily adaptations for temperature regulation, and that other uses came later.\nSpecies.\nSpecimens from two species have been found:\nIn both cases the ecology of the time was dry, with sand dunes with occasional streams.\nMedia.\nFilms such as \"Jurassic Park\" and some of \"The Land Before Time\" films helped make \"Velociraptor\" popular. However, the raptors in Jurassic Park were far larger than the real thing. They were the size of \"Deinonychus\", a larger member of the same clade. The films also exaggerated its probable intelligence."}
{"id": "43347", "revid": "1067199", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43347", "title": "Rhea (moon)", "text": "Rhea (; ), does known as Tomatoosaurus, a portmanteau of \"tomato\" + \"Tyrannosaurus\", is Saturn's second largest moon. It is made of ice and rock.\nRing system.\nRhea may have a thin ring system with three narrow bands in a disk of solid particles. These would be the first rings seen around a moon. The discovery was announced in the journal \"Science\" on March 6, 2008."}
{"id": "43348", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43348", "title": "Mimas (moon)", "text": "Mimas (from the Greek \"\u039c\u03af\u03bc\u1fb1\u03c2\") is one of Saturn's largest moons. It is also called Saturn I. Mimas is best known for its large crater, Herschel. In the centre of the crater is a very high mountain. Mimas was discovered by the English astronomer William Herschel on September 17, 1789. The moon is believed to have created the Cassini Division. This is a 4,800 km gap between Saturn's A and B rings.\nDiscovery and naming.\nMimas was discovered in 1789 by William Herschel. He discovered it on September 17. Herschel discovered it along with another Saturnian moon, Enceladus\nMimas was named after one of the Titans in mythology. Mimas was the giant.\nSurface.\nMimas is full with craters like our Moon. But unlike the craters on the Moon, Mimas has icy craters like going through an icy object.\nMimas has craters, but the most famous is the Herschel crater. It is 130 km (80 mi) in diameter. The diameter of Herschel is about 1/3 of Mimas. If a comet or asteroid that hit Mimas were to hit Earth, the crater would be seen from space with all the Earth shown in view.\nMimas would evaporate away if it was too close to the Sun.\nExploration.\nMimas has been visited by 4 or 5 spacecrafts."}
{"id": "43349", "revid": "6039464", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43349", "title": "Aphrodisiac", "text": "An aphrodisiac is a type of food or drink that gives one a higher libido. The name comes from the Greek goddess Aphrodite. A food or drink that makes a person less aroused is called an anaphrodisiac.\nSome things thought by some to be aphrodisiacs are ginko, ashwaganda, oysters and chocolate."}
{"id": "43350", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43350", "title": "Protoceratops", "text": "Protoceratops was a ceratopsian dinosaur from Mongolia. It was shown in a fossil being attacked by a \"Velociraptor\"."}
{"id": "43352", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43352", "title": "Syntarsus", "text": ""}
{"id": "43356", "revid": "1145899", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43356", "title": "Vidar", "text": "V\u00ed\u00f0arr (Old Norse: \"the wide ruling one\") is the god of vengeance in Norse mythology. A member of the \u00c6sir, he is the son of Odin and the giantess Gr\u00ed\u00f0r. During Ragnar\u00f6k, when the monstrous wolf Fenrir swallows Odin whole, V\u00ed\u00f0arr is told to avenge his father's death, as he takes Fenrir by the jaw and tears his head apart, killing Fenrir. He will ultimately survive Ragnar\u00f6k, as he will then meet with his brother V\u00e1li in I\u00f0av\u00f6llr, where Asgard once lay; there they are joined by their brothers, H\u00f6\u00f0r and Baldr, as well as Thor's sons, Magni and M\u00f3\u00f0i. After Ragnarok V\u00ed\u00f0arr will rule after Odin."}
{"id": "43357", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43357", "title": "Anchisaurus", "text": "Anchisaurus was a small sauropod dinosaur from the early Jurassic. It was shown in the movie \"When Dinosaurs Roamed America\" getting attacked by a pack of \"Megapnosaurus\" and eaten by a \"Dilophosaurus\"."}
{"id": "43358", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43358", "title": "Segisaurus", "text": "Segisaurus was a small dinosaur from the Triassic. It was a relative of \"Coelophysis\"."}
{"id": "43359", "revid": "1120403", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43359", "title": "Psittacosaurus", "text": " is a small ceratopsian dinosaur from the Lower Cretaceous of what is now Asia, about 130 to 100 million years ago. It was more basal than other members of the Ceratopsia: it was bipedal, and had no horns or frill on its head. What made it a ceratopsian was its beak.\nIt is notable for being the most species-rich dinosaur genus, but there is no general agreement on these species. Nine to eleven species are named for fossils found in different regions of China, Mongolia and Russia, with a possible additional species from Thailand.\nAll species of \"Psittacosaurus\" were gazelle-sized bipedal herbivores with a high, powerful beak on the upper jaw. At least one species had long, quill-like structures on its tail and lower back, possibly with a display function. Psittacosaurs were early ceratopsians. They developed adaptations of their own, but they also shared features with later ceratopsians, such as \"Protoceratops\" and the elephant-sized \"Triceratops\"."}
{"id": "43360", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43360", "title": "Zuniceratops", "text": "Zuniceratops was a ceratopsian dinosaur. It grew up to 13 feet (or 4 meter long. His dinosaur family came from Asia.\nHis scientific name is \"Zuniceratops christopheril\", had 2 tons."}
{"id": "43361", "revid": "624194", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43361", "title": "Quilmesaurus", "text": "Quilmesaurus was a predatory dinosaur from the Cretaceous period. It lived 95 million years ago."}
{"id": "43362", "revid": "7621752", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43362", "title": "Tsarevich Alexei Nikolaevich of Russia", "text": " \nTsarevich Alexei Nikolaevich Romanov (12 August 1904 \u2013 17 July 1918) was the heir apparent of Russia during the Russian Revolution. He would have become Tsar Alexei II. He was the youngest of five children and the only son of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and Alexandra Fyodorovna. His sisters were Olga, Tatiana, Maria, and Anastasia.\nHe had the disease hemophilia. He inherited the disease from his mother. The disease can be traced back to his great grandmother Queen Victoria. His father gave up the throne in 1917 and his family was exiled and then murdered in Ekaterinburg in 1918. When Alexei was struggling with hemophilia a Russian Orthodox monk named Grigori Rasputin, commonly known as Rasputin, healed Alexei better than any doctor could. This might have led to the family's murder, because they were so fond of Rasputin. Once Rasputin was murdered, Alexei and his family were murdered only two years later. \nIn 2000, Alexei and his family were made saints by the Russian Orthodox Church.\nIn 2008 his body was one of those found near the site where the family was murdered. DNA tests proved all 5 of the Tsar's children had been killed."}
{"id": "43363", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43363", "title": "Zalmoxes", "text": "Zalmoxes is a genus of ornithopod dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous of Romania. It was a relative of Iguanodon and, like all its order, it was a herbivore. \nMost of the skeleton is known with exception of the end of the tail, the hands and the feet."}
{"id": "43365", "revid": "7818091", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43365", "title": "Oviraptor", "text": "Oviraptor is a genus of dinosaur that is today Mongolia. \"Oviraptor\" was a relatively large-brained dinosaur which cared for its eggs. In 1924, an \"Oviraptor\" fossil was found on top of some eggs, and some thought that it had been eating the eggs. Others thought that the fossilized \"Oviraptor\" was probably a parent of the eggs in the nest, and not an egg thief.\n\"Oviraptor\" lived in the Upper Cretaceous period, about 75 million years ago. Only one definite specimen is known (with associated eggs), from Mongolia, though a possible second specimen (also with eggs) comes from the northeast region of Inner Mongolia, China.\n\"Oviraptor\" is usually drawn with a distinctive crest, similar to that of the cassowary. However, re-examination of several oviraptorids show that this well-known, tall-crested species may actually belong to a relative of \"Oviraptor\", the genus \"Citipati\". It is likely that \"Oviraptor\" did have a crest, but its exact size and shape are unknown due to crushing in the skull of the only recognized specimen.\nJudging by its relatives, \"Oviraptor\" probably had feathers. It had a toothless beak, but its feeding habits are unknown. The only \"Oviraptor\" fossil preserved the remains of a lizard in the region of its stomach cavity, implying that the species was at least partially carnivorous.\nRelatives.\nIn 1976, Barsbold put six more brooding (nest sitting) specimens into the genus \"Oviraptor\", but these were later reclassified in the new genus \"Conchoraptor\". Another specimen, IGN 100/42, is perhaps the most famous, owing to its well-preserved complete skull and large size. This specimen was referred to the genus \"Oviraptor\" by Barsbold in 1981, and was presented as \"Oviraptor\" in popular magazines and scientific studies. However, this specimen, with its distinctive tall, cassowary-like crest, was re-examined by the scientists who described the nesting oviraptorids, and found to resemble them more closely than the original specimens of \"Oviraptor\". For this reason, they removed IGN 100/42 from the genus \"Oviraptor\", suggesting it was a species of \"Citipati\"."}
{"id": "43366", "revid": "7775934", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43366", "title": "Oyster", "text": "Oysters are a family of bivalves with rough, thick shells, the Ostreidae. Some other types of shellfish are also called 'oyster'. Many species are edible, and are usually served raw. They are also good when cooked. \nIn the past, they were an important food source, especially in France and Britain. They used to grow in huge oyster beds, but were \"overfished\" in the 19th century. Nowadays they are more expensive, so eaten less often.\nOysters are usually harvested before they are fully grown. Left to themselves, they do grow quite large. A recent example was an oyster which was 11 inches long (29cm) and 3.7 lbs in weight (1.7kg). The BBC report says \"The family (firm) estimated it could be between '15 and 20 years old' due to its size. The world's largest oyster was 13.97 inches long (35.5cm) and 4.21 inches (10.7cm) in width. It was found in Denmark in December 2013, Guinness World Records said\".\nOysters are picked up from their muddy beds by dredging. The oysters are \"shucked\" from their shells before sale. Shucking is done with a short knife inserted between the upper and lower shell. The adductor muscle, which holds it closed, is cut away, and that releases the oyster. The oyster is sold loose but within its shell. Shucking method:\nThe seawater the oysters were in does not stay in the oyster. Oysters (and shellfish generally) are purified while still alive before sale. That starts after they are harvested. The oysters are put into tanks pumped with clean water for 48 to 72 hours. That protects the consumer from any foul bacteria that the oyster might have picked up from the sea or river water.\nSome of the unrelated 'oysters' are the pearl oyster, \"Pinctada\", which is a clam, and a few mussels which look a bit like oysters when they are taken out of their shells."}
{"id": "43392", "revid": "1102746", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43392", "title": "Tumour", "text": "A tumour (or tumor) is tissue that is growing where it should not be. Another name for a tumor is neoplasm. Tumours are either malignant (harmful) or benign (safe). Cancer, for example is malignant and sometimes spreads to other places on the body. Some tumours have a cause that makes them grow. For some tumours no cause is known. A tumour usually forms as a lump or mass. \nThe Tasmanian Devils in Tasmania, Australia are in danger of becoming extinct because of a malignant tumour that grows on their face."}
{"id": "43393", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43393", "title": "Tumor", "text": ""}
{"id": "43399", "revid": "6120497", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43399", "title": "99", "text": ""}
{"id": "43401", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43401", "title": "Sony Ericsson", "text": "Sony Ericsson Mobile Communications AB is a mobile phone manufacturer. The company is a joint venture that was established in 2001 by Japanese consumer electronics company Sony and the Swedish telecommunications company Ericsson. The two companies no longer make mobile phones independently."}
{"id": "43403", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43403", "title": "Australian dollar", "text": "The Australian dollar (AUD) is the official currency of the Commonwealth of Australia. It has been in use since February 14, 1966. The Australian dollar is also used on Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Norfolk Island, and the independent Pacific Islands of Kiribati, Nauru and Tuvalu. In Australia the dollar symbol $ is usually used. The signs A$ or AU$ are often used to show that it is the Australian dollar. It is subdivided into 100 cents.\nIn 2011 the Australian dollar was the fifth-most-traded currency in world. The most traded currencies were the US dollar, the Euro, the yen, and the pound sterling.\nThe Australian dollar is liked by people who trade in currencies. This is because Australia has high interest rates and little government control on currency trading. Australia's economy and political systems are also seen to be stable.\nHistory.\nThe dollar was introduced on 14 February 1966, replacing the Australian pound.\nCoins.\nFrom 1966, coins were made in amounts of 1, 2, 5, 10, 20 and 50 cents. One-dollar coins were made from 1984. Two-dollar coins were made from 1988. The one- and two-cent coins were not made after 1991 and are no longer used. Cash sales are made to the nearest five cents. All coins have the image of the head of state, Queen Elizabeth II on the back. They are made by the Royal Australian Mint in Canberra.\nAustralia has often made special 50-cent coins. The first was in 1970, to honor Captain Cook's finding the east coast of Australia. In 1977 a coin was made for Queen Elizabeth II's Silver Jubilee. In 1981 a coin was made for the wedding of Charles and Diana. The Brisbane Commonwealth Games had a special coin in 1982. Another one was made for the Australian Bicentenary in 1988. There have been many more special coins made since the 1990s. They are popular with people who collect coins. Australia has also made special 20-cent and one-dollar coins.\nAustralia has made special five-dollar coins, of aluminium/bronze and bi-metal, and many silver and gold bullion coins in bigger values. These are not normally used, although they are legal tender.\nCurrent Australian 5-, 10- and 20-cent coins are the same size as the old Australian, New Zealand and British sixpenny, shilling and two shilling (florin) coins. In 1990. the UK replaced these coins with smaller versions, as did New Zealand in 2006 - at the same time discontinuing the five-cent coin. The Australian 50-cent coin is a large coin. It weighs 15.55 grams and is 31.51 mm across.\nBanknotes.\nFirst series.\nThe first paper banknotes in Australian dollars were printed in 1966. The one, two, ten and 20-dollars notes matched the old pound banknotes. The five-dollar note was printed in 1967, after the public were used to decimal currency.\nThe one-dollar note was replaced by a coin in 1984. The two-dollar note was replaced by a coin in 1988. The 50-dollar note was first printed in 1973. In 1984 Australia printed the 100-dollar note.\nNotes are different sizes depending on their value. This is to help people are visually impaired (unable to see properly). They are the same height but different lengths. The $5 is the smallest, $100 the largest. Notes are also colour coded: $5 pink (there are two designs); $10 blue; $20 red; $50 yellow; and $100 green.\nPolymer series.\nIn 1988, the Reserve Bank of Australia gave out plastic, (polypropylene) polymer banknotes (produced by Note Printing Australia), to celebrate 200 years of European settlement in Australia. All Australian notes are now made of polymer.\nTo make it hard to copy these notes, they have see through windows with a picture image of Captain James Cook. Every note also has a seven-pointed star which has only half the printing on each side. Australian banknotes were the first in the world to use such features."}
{"id": "43404", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43404", "title": "Computing", "text": ""}
{"id": "43405", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43405", "title": "Washing machine", "text": "A washing machine is a machine that washes dirty clothes. It contains a barrel into which the clothes are placed. This barrel is filled with water, and then rotated very quickly to make the water remove dirt from the clothes. Most washing machines are made so that detergent (liquids or powders) can be put into the machine. These can help make the clothes cleaner.\nOperation.\nWashing machines have ways to control how the machine operates. Some of the possible controls are:\nTypes of washing machines.\nWashing machines may be fully automatic or partly automatic.\nSemi-Automatic Washing Machines.\nSemi-automatic washing machines have separate sections for Dryer and Washer. These washing machines are often termed as semi-manual as here you have to manually put clothes into washer tub, put water &amp; detergent according to your laundry size, and once washing is finished, you again have to manually put washed clothes for drying in dryer section. These are mostly cheaper machines.\nFully-Automatic Washing Machines.\nFully-automatic washing machines are easier to use. They have only one section for washing and for spin-drying. Once you put clothes in a fully-automatic washing machine, it automatically takes required quantity of water, detergent and just with one click provided your washed &amp; dry clothes.\nWashing machines may load from the top or the front.\nFront loading.\nA front loading washing machine has a door in the front. The clothes to be washed have to be put in and the door closed before the barrel can fill with water. This type of machine can have a clothes drying machine stacked on top to save space on the floor. Because of the water used, the washing machine is heavier than the dryer so the washer is at the bottom.\nTop loading.\nWith a top loading washing machine, the opening is at the top. The barrel can be filled with water and soap before the clothes are put in for washing. This type of machine can not have anything placed on top of it because of the opening there.\nStacked washer and dryer.\nSometimes a washing machine and a clothes dryer are put together. The washing machine is usually on the bottom of the stack because the water in it makes the machine heavier than the dryer. In this arrangement the washing machine may be front-loading or top-loading. For the top-loading washing machine, room must be left to open the door at the top to add the clothing to be washed. A front-loading washing machine can have the dryer sitting on top of it."}
{"id": "43406", "revid": "127811", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43406", "title": "Benign", "text": "The word benign is often used to refer to a medical condition that will not become life-threatening if it is not treated, but can also mean that something is not harmful. It is often used in relation to tumours that do not metastasise to other parts of the body. Tumours that are referred to as being benign may still be life-threatening because of other reasons. Because of this, the term applies mainly to their biological behaviour.\nTumors that are benign may be at risk of changing into malignancy. These are termed \"premalignant\"."}
{"id": "43411", "revid": "268071", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43411", "title": "Frankfurt U-Bahn", "text": "The Frankfurt U-Bahn is an underground railway network in the city of Frankfurt, Germany. It is run by the \"Verkehrsgesellschaft Frankfurt\", short VGF. It has 9 lines and a network of 65 kilometers (40 miles) and has exactly 86 stations, apart 27 underground and 59 above ground. Two lines, the U2 and the U3 crosses the city border in Oberursel and Bad Homburg."}
{"id": "43412", "revid": "5073317", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43412", "title": "Geraldton, Western Australia", "text": "Geraldton is a city and port in Western Australia 424 km north of Perth. 29,996 people live there, which makes it the fifth-largest city in Western Australia.\nToday the city is an important for mining, fishing, wheat, sheep and tourism."}
{"id": "43415", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43415", "title": "Towomba", "text": ""}
{"id": "43417", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43417", "title": "Ballarat", "text": ""}
{"id": "43418", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43418", "title": "Benalla", "text": ""}
{"id": "43419", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43419", "title": "Down's syndrome", "text": ""}
{"id": "43424", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43424", "title": "Frankfurt Airport", "text": "Frankfurt Airport ( ) is the biggest airport in Germany, the third largest in Europe in terms of passengers, and second-largest in Europe in terms of cargo. It is in Frankfurt.\nIn 2005, 52 million passengers flew from Frankfurt and 1.89 million tonnes of cargo.\nThe airport has two train stations, the terminal for the commuter trains is under the terminal and the station for the long-distance trains is five minutes to walk.\nUntil 2005, the Rhein-Main Air Base was in the south of the civil airport. Frankfurt airport recorded its all-time hottest temperature in July 2015 at 101.8\u00a0\u00b0F (38.8\u00a0\u00b0C)."}
{"id": "43428", "revid": "6022325", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43428", "title": "Marki", "text": "Marki is a town near Warsaw, in Poland. About 23,300 people live there."}
{"id": "43435", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43435", "title": "William Harvey", "text": "William Harvey was an English medical doctor. He was born in Folkestone, Kent, England on 1 April 1573. He was the first to explain how blood was moved through the body by the heart. He died on 3 June 1657 in Roehampton.\nA hospital in Ashford, Kent is named after Harvey. He went to The King's School, Canterbury, then Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. He then went to University of Padua where he graduated in 1602.\nWhen Harvey returned to England he married Elizabeth Browne, the daughter of Elizabeth I's royal physician. He became a doctor at St. Bartholomew's Hospital in London from 1609 until 1643.\nCirculatory system.\nWilliam Harvey is famous for his idea on blood being pumped around the body by the heart. He was the first to describe correctly and in detail the circulation and its properties. A few men knew about the lesser circulation of the blood through the lungs, but their work was lost. One 16th century work on theology, entitled \"Cristianismi restitutio\", was written by Miguel Serveto. After he had been burnt at the stake for heresy (by Calvin), his book was destroyed. Three copies survived. A century and a half later, long after Harvey, someone noticed he had said something about the blood circulating.\nHarvey announced his discoveries about the circulatory system in 1616 during a series of lectures (his lecture notes still exist). He wrote a book (\"Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et sanguinis in Animalibus\") about it in 1628. He said that blood was pumped around the body in a closed system. Blood was pumped by the heart through the body before coming back to the heart to repeat the process. This went against what was believed at the time to be true.\nThe Roman doctor, Galen believed that there were two systems in the body dealing with blood. It was thought at the time that the dark red blood in veins came from the liver and the bright red blood in arteries came from the heart. It was believed that the liver and heart made the blood and it was used up by the body parts it was pumped to.\nHarvey's ideas came from dissecting human bodies. Harvey found that the liver would have to make 540 pounds of blood every hour for Galen to be right. This showed him that the blood was not being used up. It was being reused by the body. He said blood flowed through the heart in two loops. One loop went to the lungs and got oxygen. The other loop went to the organs and body tissue giving them the oxygen. He said the heart was just a pump that pumped blood around the body.\n\"Ex ovo omne vivum\".\nHarvey made another great discovery. He said (in Latin) \"Every living thing comes from an egg\". At that time it was not known that mammals came from eggs. It was not known until Karl Ernst von Baer discovered the eggs of mammals in 1827. The fusion of sperm with egg was first seen by Oskar Hertwig in 1876."}
{"id": "43437", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43437", "title": "Zoey 101", "text": "Zoey 101 is an American television series. It was on Nickelodeon from 9 January 2005 until 2 May 2008. It is about on the lives of teenagers at a boarding school, Pacific Coast Academy (PCA). The main character is Zoey Brooks, played by Jamie Lynn Spears. The series was created by Dan Schneider. It was nominated for an \"Outstanding Children's Program\" Emmy Award in 2005. \"Zoey 101\" was the most expensive production ever for Nickelodeon series. It was shot completely on location in Malibu. It was also Nickelodeon's best performance for a series premiere in almost eight years. However, many critics have made negative comments about the show. Jamie Lynn Spears has been playing Zoey for 3 years from 2005 till 2008.\nPlot.\nZoey Brooks goes to a once all-boys boarding school in California, where she must fit in, even though she is a girl. The series focuses on normal problems that a teenage girl may have to deal with. Zoey has two best friends called Lola and Quinn.\nVideo game.\nSeveral video games based on the television series were developed by THQ. They were published by Barking Lizards.\nThe original was released on 2 March 2007 for Gameboy Advance. Players play mini-games in trios for three semesters (levels), with a final game at the end. Players must successfully complete each mini-game, then a dare, and then a challenge. Dares and challenges are randomly chosen from three games. Players can choose to play mini-games freely in the main menu. Mini-games can only be unlocked in story mode. The game received negative reviews from sites such as Nintendo World Report and Common Sense. Game Rankings had a percent of 40% based on 2 reviews.\n\"Zoey 101: Field Trip Fiasco\" was released for Nintendo DS. It was released in the U.S. on September 11, 2007. The plot involves Zoey wanting to do a documentary movie about the local national park. The player controls Zoey. The player has to go around the Pacific Coast Academy delivering things to people, or collect objects scattered around the school before time runs out. A map can be pulled out to help. After finishing fetch quests, the player plays a Minigame. Minigames require Scribbling on the touch screen to hose off cars or picking up Frisbees. Minigames last about 2 minutes. This game also received bad reviews. Metacritic had a score of 31/100 and Game Rankings had a score of 41.25% both based on 4 critics."}
{"id": "43440", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43440", "title": "Bare", "text": ""}
{"id": "43441", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43441", "title": "Velocisaurus", "text": "Velocisaurus was a theropod dinosaur related to \"Ceratosaurus\". Its remains were found in Patagonia, in strata from the Cretaceous period.\nThis animal is known only from its leg and feet bones. \"Velocisaurus\" was probably around 1.2 meters long (4 ft). The foot is unique in that the middle (third) metatarsal (foot bone) was the main weight-bearing element. Its upper end has thickened and the shafts of the adjoining second and fourth metatarsals have thinned considerably. Such a condition is unknown for other theropods, including birds, but a similar set-up occurred in three-toed horses (like \"Mesohippus\"). Jos\u00e9 Bonaparte explained it as an adaptation for a cursorial (running) lifestyle. He suggested that \"Velocisaurus\" was itself an omnivore, because the sole claw found, of the fourth toe, was not curved, but relatively straight."}
{"id": "43442", "revid": "145452", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43442", "title": "Valdosaurus", "text": "Valdosaurus (\"Weald Lizard\") is a type of dinosaur. It walked on two legs and ate plants. It was found on the Isle of Wight and other places in England. It lived during the Lower Cretaceous.\nIt is part of the Dryosauridae family. It is related to the Iguanodonts."}
{"id": "43443", "revid": "7626661", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43443", "title": "Irish Potato Famine", "text": "The Great Famine, Great Hunger, or Potato Famine is the name given to the famine in Ireland in the years 1845-1852. Outside Ireland, it is usually called the Irish Potato Famine. The famine was caused by \"the potato blight\", a fungus-like organism which quickly destroyed the potatoes in Ireland, and throughout Europe. The effect was particularly bad in Ireland because potatoes were the staple food for most Irish people at the time.\nIt is believed that between 1 million to 1.5 million people died in the three years from 1846 to 1849 because of hunger or disease. Another million became refugees because of the famine. Many people who left Ireland moved to Great Britain, (mostly to the nearby town of Liverpool), the United States, Canada and Australia.\nIn Ireland this time is referred to as \"the starvation\". The potato was the only crop affected, yet Ireland continued to produce corn, wheat, barley, and beef. However, the mostly English landlords made a bigger profit by selling these food products elsewhere.\nBy the late 17th century, potatoes had become common as a supplementary rather than a major food. The diet was mainly around butter, milk, and grain products. Potato became a base food of the poor, especially in winter. The lack of genetic variability among the potato plants in Ireland caused the emergence of \"Phytophthora infestans\" which had devastating effects in Ireland. Another factor is that holdings were so small that no crop other than potatoes would be able to feed a family.\nStarting in 1801, Ireland had been directly governed, under the Act of Union as part of the United Kingdom. In the 40 years after the union, British governments grappled with the problems of governing the country. One historian calculated that, between 1801 and 1845, there had been 114 commissions and 61 special committees enquiring into the state of Ireland. \"Without exception their findings prophesied disaster. Ireland was on the verge of starvation, her population rapidly increasing, three-quarters of her labourers unemployed, housing conditions appalling and the standard of living unbelievably low\". It was caused by monoculture because they only planted one main crop and let its disease infest all other potatoes in the Irish territory."}
{"id": "43444", "revid": "6034548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43444", "title": "Wannanosaurus", "text": "Wannanosaurus is the smallest known ornithischian dinosaur. Its length is estimated at just less than a metre. It lived in the Upper Cretaceous, about 80 million years ago, and was found in Anhui, China. \nIt is known from a single partial skeleton, including a partial skull roof and lower jaw, an upper leg and lower leg, part of a rib, and other fragments. It was herbivorous, but may also have eaten insects. \"Wannosaurus\" means Wanno lizard. It is one of several pachycephalosaurs with flat-topped skulls."}
{"id": "43445", "revid": "1155722", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43445", "title": "Chihuahua (dog)", "text": "Their kids are called chihuahua puppies.\u2020\nA chihuahua is a very small kind of dog and is bred to be a pet.\nAppearance.\nThey can reach a height of 6-9 inches (12.7\u201320.3\u00a0cm) and a weight of 2\u20136 pounds (0.9\u20132.7\u00a0kg). Chihuahuas can have a long or short coat, and come in many different colors. These are black, white, beige, brown, and dark brown. They only need grooming once a week if short coat or it may be twice if you have a long coat. Chihuahuas can have up to six puppies because of their small bodies.\nOrigins.\nThe Chihuahua's start goes back to Mexico as the descendants of the Techichi, a long haired and silent dog. The Techichi was liked by the Toltec people, one of the indigenous (original) people of Mexico. Chihuahuas are believed to have been made by breeding the Techichi and Chinese Crested Dogs (a type of small hairless dog) to form today's Chihuahuas.\nAnother possible start for Chihuahuas was the breeding of Techichis with Spanish terriers, which were well liked at the time and were known for their small body and black and tan colors. Mating with another type of dog increased the loudness of the Techichi's bark while making it smaller.\nChihuahuas were named after the Chihuahua state in Mexico. The word Chihuahua comes from the Na'huatl word \"xicuagua\", which means \"sandy, dry place\"."}
{"id": "43446", "revid": "983938", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43446", "title": "Minmi", "text": "Minmi is a genus of small ankylosaurian dinosaur that lived during the Lower Cretaceous of Australia, about 119 to 113 million years ago.\nA recent cladistic analysis suggests that \"Minmi\" is the most basal known ankylosaur.\nThat does not mean it was the ancestor of the group; it is far too late for that. It means its body is not specialized, and is relatively unchanged from whatever was the ancestral group.\nTwo good specimens of \"Minmi\" have been described, including a mostly complete skeleton, and additional fragments may belong to this genus. The dinosaur grew to about 2\u00a0m (6.5\u00a0ft) long (Holtz), or 3\u00a0m long and weighed about 300 kilograms (Paul). It was roughly 1\u00a0m (3\u00a0ft) tall to the top of the shoulder.\nPaleobiology.\n\"Minmi\" is classified in the Ankylosauria, but is too 'primitive' (basal) to be included in either the Ankylosauridae or Nodosauridae.\nAs with other ankylosaurians, \"Minmi\" was herbivorous Unlike most herbivorous dinosaurs, there is direct evidence of the diet of \"Minmi\": gut contents are known from the well-preserved nearly complete specimen. The gut contents consist of fragments of fibrous or vascular plant tissue, fruiting bodies, spherical seeds, and tissue (possibly from fern sporangia). The most common remains are the fibrous or vascular fragments, which have clean cut ends.\nBecause of the small size of the fragments, they are probably nibbled from plants or chopped in the mouth. These small fragments may have come from twigs or stems, but their size is more suggestive of vascular bundles in leaves. The clean cuts, and lack of gastroliths, suggest that the animal relied on chewing to grind food. The seeds (0.3\u00a0mm [0.01\u00a0in] across) and fruiting bodies (4.5\u00a0mm [0.18\u00a0in] across) were apparently swallowed whole. When compared to gut contents and scat from modern herbivorous lizard, emu and goose, this shows \"Minmi\" had a more sophisticated process for cutting up plant material.\nIt had bony protrusions on its head, back, abdomen, legs and along the tail. Several types of armour are known in place in \"Minmi\", including small ossicles, small keeled scutes on the body, large scutes without keels on the snout, large keeled scutes on the neck, shoulders, and possibly tail, spike-like scutes on the hips, and a combination of ridged and keeled scutes and triangular plates on the tail. There was one preserved ring of scutes around the neck. The arrangement of armour is unclear on the tail, although the triangular plates may have run on the sides of the tail, with long scutes forming a row along the top of the tail. However, unlike other ankylosaurians, \"Minmi\" had horizontal plates of bones that ran along the sides of its vertebrae (hence its species name, \"M. paravertebra\")."}
{"id": "43447", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43447", "title": "Rugops", "text": "Rugops was a dinosaur related to \"Carnotaurus\". It lived in what is now Africa, about 95 million years ago. It was a medium-sized carnivorous dinosaur, up to 27 feet long. \n\"Rugops\" lived at the same time \"Spinosaurus\", \"Carcharodontosaurus\", and \"Deltadromeus\", in the Upper Cretaceous. \n\"Rugops\" was a carnivore, with weak jaws and small teeth. It may have been a scavenger, feeding on dead animals. It also may have preyed on sauropods, such as \"Paralititan\" and \"Aegyptosaurus\", and ornithopods, such as \"Ouranosaurus\". The name \"Rugops\" means \"wrinkled face\". The bony wrinkles on its snout may have helped to support a structure, such as horny crest or a wattle, like on a rooster or a turkey. "}
{"id": "43449", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43449", "title": "Abrictosaurus", "text": "Abrictosaurus was a heterodontosaurid dinosaur from the Lower Jurassic of what is now southern Africa. It was a small bipedal herbivore or omnivore, about 1.2\u00a0meters (4\u00a0feet) long, and weighing less than 45\u00a0kilograms (100\u00a0pounds).\n\"Abrictosaurus\" is usually thought to be the most basal member of the family Heterodontosauridae. \"Lycorhinus\" and \"Heterodontosaurus\" both had high-crowned cheek teeth, which went over each other in the jaw, making a continuous chewing surface analogous to those of Cretaceous hadrosaurids. \"Abrictosaurus\" had more widely-split cheek teeth, with lower crowns, more similar to other early ornithischians. \nThe family as a whole has canine-like tusks. Tusks were clearly present on one of the two specimens of \"Abrictosaurus\". The upper caniniform measured 10.5\u00a0millimeters (0.4\u00a0inches) high, while the lower reached 17\u00a0mm (0.67\u00a0in). \n\"Abrictosaurus\" had smaller, less powerful forelimbs than \"Heterodontosaurus\" and one fewer phalanx bone (finger joint) in both the fourth and fifth digits of the forelimb."}
{"id": "43450", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43450", "title": "Heterodontosaurus", "text": "Heterodontosaurus (meaning \"different toothed lizard\") is a genus of small herbivorous dinosaur with prominent canine teeth. \nIt lived in the Lower Jurassic of South Africa, 200\u2013190 million years ago. It was related to \"Abrictosaurus\". It had three different kinds of teeth."}
{"id": "43451", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43451", "title": "Camarasaurus", "text": "Camarasaurus (meaning \"chambered lizard\") was a large plant-eating sauropod. It was about 18 meters long and weighed about 18 metric tones. Its name comes from its skull, which is in the shape of an arch. It lived during the late Jurassic, between 155 and 145 million years ago. These dinosaurs may have lived in herds.\nIt was first discovered in 1877 in Colorado by Oramel W. Lucas. Its fossil remains have been found in the Morrison Formation of Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming.\nThere are four species of Camarasaurus:\nIt was shown in the movie \"When Dinosaurs Roamed America\".\nSkull.\n\"Camarasaurus\" is among the most common and frequently well-preserved sauropod dinosaurs. The maximum size of the most common species, \"C. lentus\", was about 15\u00a0meters (50\u00a0ft) in length. The largest species, \"C. supremus\", reached a maximum length of 23\u00a0meters (75\u00a0ft) and maximum estimated weight of 47\u00a0tonnes (51.8\u00a0tons).\nThe arched skull of \"Camarasaurus\" was remarkably square and the blunt snout had many fenestrae (openings). It was sturdy and is often found in good condition by paleontologists. The 19\u00a0centimeter long (7.5\u00a0in) teeth were shaped like chisels (spatulate) and arranged evenly along the jaw. The strength of the teeth indicates that \"Camarasaurus\" probably ate coarser plant material than the slender-toothed diplodocids.\nPalaeobiology.\nThere is a fossil record of two adults and a 12.2\u00a0meter (40\u00a0ft) long juvenile that died together in the late Jurassic leriod, about 150 million years ago (northeast Wyoming). It is assumed that their bodies were washed to their final resting place, in river mud. This suggests that \"Camarasaurus\" traveled in herds or, at least, 'family' groups. Also, recovered camarasaur eggs have been found in lines, rather than in neatly arranged nests as with some other dinosaurs, which appears to suggest that, like most sauropods, \"Camarasaurus\" did not tend its young."}
{"id": "43452", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43452", "title": "Zizhongosaurus", "text": "Zizhongosaurus was a very large plant-eating dinosaur. It was a large sauropod, related to \"Camarasaurus\"."}
{"id": "43454", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43454", "title": "Burping", "text": "Burping is when gas comes out of the stomach through the mouth. Burping happens when air is trapped in the stomach. \"Esophageal speech\" means to \"burp\" words."}
{"id": "43456", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43456", "title": "Stygivenator", "text": ""}
{"id": "43473", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43473", "title": "Great Fire of London", "text": "The Great Fire of London happened in Central London in 1666. The fire lasted for just under five days, from 2nd September until 6th September.\nIt is believed to have destroyed the homes of 70,000 of the 80,000 people that lived in the city. It is not known how many people died in the fire. Only a few deaths are certain, but for many of the victims there were no records. The fire may have cremated many, leaving no recognisable remains. It threatened the aristocratic district of Westminster (the modern West End), Charles II's Palace of Whitehall, and most of the suburban slums, however, it never reached these districts. \nThe fire started at the bakery of Thomas Farriner (or Farynor) on Pudding Lane. It began just after midnight on Sunday 2nd September and grew very fast. Firefighters of the time usually made firebreaks by destroying buildings around the fire so it could not spread. This did not happen quick enough. Lord Mayor, Sir Thomas Bloodworth was not certain what to do. By the time he ordered such measures, it was too late. The Tower of London guard used gunpowder to make good firebreaks that stopped the fire from spreading to the east.\nThe fire pushed north on Monday into the center of the city. Some people thought that foreigners were setting the fires. They believed it was the French and Dutch, who at that time were England's enemies in the Anglo-Dutch Wars. On Thursday, the fire spread over most of the City, destroying St. Paul's Cathedral and crossed over the River Fleet. It was close to setting fire to Charles II's court at Whitehall.\nThe social and economic problems created from this were very large. Leaving London to go and live elsewhere was strongly encouraged by Charles II. He feared a London rebellion amongst the refugees who had lost their property. Despite numerous radical proposals, London was reconstructed on essentially the same street plan used before the fire.\nThe fire is said to have also helped to get rid of the Great Plague which had hit London in 1665, and killed about 70,000 of the 90,000 population, who may have died in the fire. We are able to know a lot about the great fire of London because Samuel Pepys wrote in his famous diary at the time. When the fire started, he looked out of his window, saw the fire and started writing about it. \nDamages.\nThe damages have been calculated to 13,500 houses, 87 parish churches, 44 Company Halls, the Royal Exchange, the Custom House, St Paul's Cathedral, the Bridewell Palace and other City prisons, the General Letter Office, and the three western city gates\u2014Ludgate, Newgate, and Aldersgate."}
{"id": "43482", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43482", "title": "Golgi complex", "text": "The Golgi complex, also known as the Golgi apparatus or simply the Golgi, is a cytoplasmic organelle. It is found in eukaryote cells, as in animals, plants, and fungi. \nThe complex was discovered by Camillo Golgi in 1898. Golgi, who worked at Pavia, Italy, was ignored. His discovery was said to be dirt on his lenses. Years later, electron microscope pictures showed structures just like in the original Golgi drawings. It is made of several flattened sac-like membranes which look like a stack of pancakes.\nThe main function of the Golgi apparatus is to process and package macromolecules, such as proteins and lipids. They come to the Golgi after being built, and before they go to their destination. Much of the enzymatic processing is post-translational modification of proteins. The Golgi complex inspects them for flaws and discards extra material added during their manufacture, wraps them up and then targets them for packaging. The Golgi complex is especially active in processing proteins for secretion. The Golgi releases special enzymes called lysosomes, which clean off any extra amino acids. When the package is ready, it is pinched off the Golgi and released into the cytoplasm. \nThe Golgi complex is part of the cellular membrane system, and so is the endoplasmic reticulum. "}
{"id": "43485", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43485", "title": "Nude", "text": ""}
{"id": "43486", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43486", "title": "Institut Teknologi Bandung", "text": "Institut Teknologi Bandung (ITB) is a public government-funded, higher education, technology school located in Bandung, West Java, Indonesia. Institut Teknologi Bandung are the one of most popular university in Indonesia, together with Gadjah Mada University and University of Indonesia. The symbol of Institut Teknologi Bandung is Ganesha, a Hindu god representing wisdom."}
{"id": "43487", "revid": "2337", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43487", "title": "Gregor Johann Mendel", "text": ""}
{"id": "43488", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43488", "title": "Superconductor", "text": "A superconductor is a substance that conducts electricity without resistance when it becomes colder than a \"critical temperature.\" At this temperature, electrons can move freely through the material. Superconductors are different from ordinary conductors, even very good ones. Ordinary conductors lose their resistance slowly as they get colder. In contrast, superconductors lose their resistance all at once. This is an example of a phase transition. High magnetic fields destroy superconductivity and restore the normal conducting state.\nNormally, a magnet moving by a conductor produces currents in the conductor by electromagnetic induction. But a superconductor actually pushes out magnetic fields entirely by inducing surface currents.\u00a0Instead of letting the magnetic field pass through, the superconductor acts like a magnet pointing the opposite way, which repels the real magnet. This is called the Meissner effect, and it can be demonstrated by levitating a superconductor over magnets or vice versa.\nExplanation.\nPhysicists explain superconductivity by describing what happens when temperatures get cold. The thermal energy in a solid or liquid shakes the atoms so they randomly vibrate, but this gets less as the temperature drops. Electrons carry the same negative electric charge which makes them repel each other. At higher temperatures each electron behaves as if it were a free particle. There is also however a very weak attraction between electrons when they are in a solid or liquid. At rather large distances ( many hundreds of nanometers apart) and low temperatures (near absolute zero), the attractive effect and lack of thermal energy allows pairs of electrons to hang together. This is called a cooper pair and it is a quasiparticle , that is it acts as if it were a new kind of particle in its own right even though it is made up of two fundamental electrons. Many overlapping cooper pairs can exist in the same nanometer sized space. Since paired electrons constitute a boson the motions of all of the cooper pairs within a single superconductor synchronise and they function as if they are a single entity. Small disturbances such as scattering of electrons are forbidden in this state and it moves as one showing no resistance to its motion. It is hence now a superconductor. "}
{"id": "43491", "revid": "39678", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43491", "title": "Morals", "text": ""}
{"id": "43492", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43492", "title": "The great fire of london", "text": ""}
{"id": "43508", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43508", "title": "Alan Freeman", "text": "Alan Leslie \"Fluff\" Freeman (born 6 July 1927 in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, died 27 November 2006 in London, England) was an Australian radio presenter who worked for most of his career in the United Kingdom.\nIn May 2000 he was presented with a Lifetime Achievement award at the Sony Radio Academy Awards.\nFreeman was best known for presenting \"Pick of the Pops\" on BBC Radio 1 throughout the 1960s and 1970s.\nFreeman was openly bisexual."}
{"id": "43519", "revid": "261652", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43519", "title": "Sunflower", "text": "The sunflower (\"Helianthus annuus\") is a living annual plant in the family Asteraceae, with a large flower head (\"capitulum\"). The stem of the flower can grow up to 3 metres tall, with a flower head that can be 30\u00a0cm wide. Other types of sunflowers include the California Royal Sunflower, which has a burgundy (red + purple) flower head. \nThe flower head is actually an inflorescence made of hundreds or thousands of tiny flowers called florets. The central florets look like the centre of a normal flower, apseudanthium. The benefit to the plant is that it is very easily seen by the insects and birds which pollinate it, and it produces thousands of seeds.\nThe sunflower is the state flower of Kansas. That is why Kansas is sometimes called the Sunflower State.\nTo grow well, sunflowers need full sun. They grow best in fertile, wet, well-drained soil with a lot of mulch. In commercial planting, seeds are planted 45\u00a0cm (1.5\u00a0ft) apart and 2.5\u00a0cm (1\u00a0in) deep.\nDescription.\nThe outer petal-bearing florets are the sterile florets and can be yellow, red, orange, or other colors. The florets inside the circular head are called disc florets, which mature into seeds.\nThe flower petals within the sunflower's cluster are always in a spiral pattern. Generally, each floret is oriented toward the next by approximately the golden angle, 137.5\u00b0, producing a pattern of interconnecting spirals, where the number of left spirals and the number of right spirals are successive Fibonacci numbers. Typically, there are 34 spirals in one direction and 55 in the other; on a very large sunflower there could be 89 in one direction and 144 in the other.\nSunflowers commonly grow to heights between 1.5 and 3.5\u00a0m (5\u201312\u00a0ft.). The tallest sunflower confirmed by Guinness World Records is 9.17 m (2014, Germany). In 16th century Europe the record was already 7.3 m (24\u00a0ft., Spain). Most cultivars are variants of \"H. annuus\", but four other species (all perennials) are also domesticated. This includes \"H. tuberosus\", the Jerusalem Artichoke, which produces edible tubers.\nAs food.\nSunflower \"whole seed\" (fruit) are sold as a snack food, after roasting in ovens, with or without salt added. Sunflowers can be processed into a peanut butter alternative, Sunbutter. In Germany, it is mixed together with rye flour to make Sonnenblumenkernbrot (literally: sunflower whole seed bread), which is quite popular in German-speaking Europe. It is also sold as food for birds and can be used directly in cooking and salads.\nSunflower oil, extracted from the seeds, is used for cooking, as a carrier oil and to produce margarine and biodiesel, as it is cheaper than olive oil. A range of sunflower varieties exist with differing fatty acid compositions; some 'high oleic' types contain a higher level of healthy monounsaturated fats in their oil than Olive oil.\nThe cake remaining after the seeds have been processed for oil is used as a livestock feed. Some recently developed cultivars have drooping heads. These cultivars are less attractive to gardeners growing the flowers as ornamental plants, but appeal to farmers, because they reduce bird damage and losses from some plant diseases. Sunflowers also produce latex and are the subject of experiments to improve their suitability as an alternative crop for producing hypoallergenic rubber.\nTraditionally, several Native American groups planted sunflowers on the north edges of their gardens as a \"fourth sister\" to the better known three sisters combination of corn, beans, and squash.[9] Annual species are often planted for their allelopathic properties. However, for commercial farmers growing commodity crops, the sunflower, like any other unwanted plant, is often considered a weed. Especially in the midwestern USA, wild (perennial) species are often found in corn and soybean fields and can have a negative impact on yields.\nSunflowers may also be used to extract toxic ingredients from soil, such as lead, arsenic and uranium. They were used to remove uranium, cesium-137, and strontium-90 from soil after the Chernobyl disaster (see phytoremediation)."}
{"id": "43528", "revid": "7672725", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43528", "title": "Peter Cushing", "text": "Peter Cushing, OBE (26 May 1913 \u2013 11 August 1994) was an English actor. He is best known for his roles in horror movies and \"\".\nCareer.\nBorn Peter Wilton Cushing in London, England. His movie career began in 1939 in a small role in \"The Man in the Iron Mask\" (1939), followed by \"Laddie\" (1940). He interpreted the role of Osric, in the classic written by William Shakespeare, \"Hamlet\" (1948), with Laurence Olivier.\nHis best roles he played in his career were the Victor Frankenstein, in the British horror movie \"The Curse of Frankenstein\" (1957), by Terence Fisher he plays of role brilliantly, Victor creates a monster in the attic of his castle. His other role was that of Doctor Van Helsing in \"Dracula\" (1958), in this movie he must fight Dracula. In these two movies he was accompanied by another great actor Christopher Lee. They formed a very successful duo, starring in dozens of Hammer movies as \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" (1959), \"The Mummy\" (1959), \"The Gorgon\" (1964), \"Dr. Terror's House of Horrors\" (1965). They clashed again as Van Helsing and Dracula, in \"Dracula A.D. 1972\" (1972), and \"The Satanic Rites of Dracula\" (1974).\nAlso re-interpret the character of Baron Frankenstein, in \"The Revenge of Frankenstein\" (1958), \"The Evil of Frankenstein\" (1964), by Freddie Francis, \"Frankenstein Created Woman\" (1967), \"Frankenstein Must Be Destroyed\" (1969), and \"Frankenstein and the Monster from Hell\" (1974), directed by Terence Fisher.\nPeter Cushing also teamed with Vincent Price in movies including \"Scream and Scream Again\" (1970), \"Dr. Phibes Rises Again\" (1972), \"Madhouse\" (1974), which plays an evil agent movie., and \"House of the Long Shadows\" (1983). \nIn 1977 he obtained the role of Grand Moff Tarkin, in \"Star Wars\" by George Lucas. \nIn the last years of his career had appearances in some comedies \"Top Secret!\" (1984). \nHis last job was in 1986 in the movie \"Biggles\" (1986). \nIn 1982 he was diagnosed with prostate cancer. He died of the disease in 1994.\nTelevision.\nCushing also made \u200btelevision, in mystery series, including \"Sherlock Holmes\" (1968), as Sherlock Holmes, \"The Avengers\", \"Great Mysteries\", \"Space: 1999\", \"The New Avengers\", \"Hammer House of Horror\", and the TV movies \"The Masks of Death\" (1984), as Sherlock Holmes"}
{"id": "43529", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43529", "title": "Peter cushing", "text": ""}
{"id": "43533", "revid": "361921", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43533", "title": "Brian Krause", "text": "Brian Krause (born February 1, 1969) is an American actor. He grew up in El Toro, California. He is best known for his role as Leo Wyatt on the WB Network television series \"Charmed\" from 1998 to 2006.\nKrause made his first movie as Richard Lestrange in the movie sequel \"Return to the Blue Lagoon\" (1991). A year later, he also starred opposite Alice Krige, playing Charles Brady in the horror movie \"Sleepwalkers\".\nBrian and his wife Beth Bruce had their first child, Jamen, in 1996. They divorced in 2000. He dated co-star Alyssa Milano. During his time off the set, he enjoys being a handyman which was his job before acting (and was his character's job when he played Leo Wyatt on \"Charmed\"). He also enjoys golf and auto racing."}
{"id": "43534", "revid": "628332", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43534", "title": "Julian McMahon", "text": "Julian McMahon (born 27 July 1968, in Sydney, Australia) is an Australian actor and former model. His father, Sir William McMahon was Prime Minister of Australia from 1971\u20131972. McMahon is best known for playing Cole Turner on the television series \"Charmed\", Doctor Doom in the 2005-2007 \"Fantastic Four\" movie series and Christian Troy on the series \"Nip/Tuck\"."}
{"id": "43535", "revid": "361921", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43535", "title": "Ted King", "text": "Theodore William King (born October 1, 1965) is an American actor. He was born in Hollywood, California. Ted King is also credited as T.W. King.\nKing is first known to soap opera fans as Danny Roberts on \"Loving\" in 1999 and \"The City\" until the series was went off the air in March 1997. He had the starring role in the series \"Timecop\" on ABC in the fall of 1997. He was on the series \"Charmed\" as Inspector Andy Trudeau from 1998 to 1999. In 2002, King returned to soaps operas as Luis Alcazar on \"General Hospital\" for a few months until his character was killed on the series. In 2003, he returned to \"General Hospital\" as Luis' twin brother, Lorenzo Alcazar."}
{"id": "43537", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43537", "title": "Coffs Harbour", "text": "Coffs Harbour is a city on the north coast of New South Wales, Australia. It is 540\u00a0km north of Sydney and 440\u00a0km south of Brisbane. Coffs Harbour is famous for its bananas and is also an important diving spot. It also has a campus of the Southern Cross University. It is the home of the Big Banana, a tourist attraction and amusement park."}
{"id": "43539", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43539", "title": "Bendigo", "text": ""}
{"id": "43540", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43540", "title": "Warrnambool", "text": ""}
{"id": "43541", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43541", "title": "Cairns", "text": ""}
{"id": "43542", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43542", "title": "Albury", "text": ""}
{"id": "43543", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43543", "title": "Grafton", "text": ""}
{"id": "43544", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43544", "title": "Maitland", "text": ""}
{"id": "43548", "revid": "6611", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43548", "title": "Language science", "text": ""}
{"id": "43560", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43560", "title": "Yggdrasil", "text": "Yggdrasil (Old Norse: \"Yggdrasill\") is the name of the immense cosmic tree that serves as the connection between the Nine Worlds in Norse mythology. Known as the World Tree, Yggdrasil was said to lie at the very center of the universe, supported by three roots which extend far away into varying locations. Various creatures dwell within Yggdrasil. Upon the onset of Ragnar\u00f6k, Yggdrasil will shutter and groan, ultimately crumbling as the universe meets its end. \nYggdrasil and Its Structure.\nYggdrasil's roots extend into three locations: Ur\u00f0arbrunnr (Old Norse: \u201cWell of Ur\u00f0r\u201d), Hvergelmir (Old Norse: \u201cbubbling\" or \"boiling spring\"), and M\u00edmisbrunnr (Old Norse: \u201cWell of M\u00edmir\"). As seen in the Poetic Edda poem, Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l (Old Norse: \"Sayings of Gr\u00edmnir\"), various creatures dwell within the World Tree, including: \nN\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr (Old Norse: \"N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr\" - \u201cMalice striker\u201d), a massive dragon/serpent-like being that gnaws at its root(s), an unnamed eagle, and the hawk Ve\u00f0rf\u00f6lnir (Old Norse: \u201cwind bleached\u201d or \u201cwind-witherer\u201d), who sits between its eyes, along with the four stags D\u00e1inn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr, and Dura\u00fer\u00f3r. \nThe Three Norns (Old Norse: \"Nornir\") - Ur\u00f0r (Old Norse: \u201cfate\u201d), Ver\u00f0andi (Old Norse: possibly \u201chappening\u201d or \u201cpresent\u201d), and Skuld (Old Norse: possibly \u201cdebt\u201d or \u201cfuture\u201d) - attend to Yggdrasil, weaving the fates of both gods and men. "}
{"id": "43562", "revid": "7885870", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43562", "title": "Impeachment", "text": "When Donald Trump got impeached, he should've gotten kicked out of office and prevented him from running for office again. is a way to remove government officers from office in some countries.\nUnited States.\nImpeachment in the United States is the process by which the House of Representatives brings charges against either the President, the Vice President, or any federal officer for misconduct alleged to have been committed. The Senate then votes to decide if the federal officer is guilty or not guilty of the charges brought against them. If the Senate declares not guilty, the federal officer keeps his or her position but remains impeached. However, if the Senate finds the federal officer guilty, the federal officer will be removed from office. \nWhen the founding fathers wrote the rules for impeachment in the Constitution of the United States, they deliberately made the removal process very difficult. To impeach, the Senate must vote by a two-thirds majority to remove the President, Vice President, or a federal officer. The United States Senate has 100 Senators, at least 60 of them must vote to approve removing the president. The constitution provides all 50 states at least two Senate seats meaning each state elects two Senators to represent them in the United States Senate. This means to successfully remove a President from office, one of two things must occur:\nIt is like an indictment (what the prosecutor needs to get before a trial). Someone is impeached when a legislature votes to do that. Later, there is another vote on whether or not to convict, which is like guilty or not. The second vote may be by the same people who did the impeachment, or someone else as in a bicameral legislature. Several different types of office holders may be impeached, but cases against the President or leader of a country usually attract the most attention.\nTwo well-known heads of state who were impeached and removed from office were Brazilian president Dilma Rousseff in 2016 and South Korean president Park Geun-hye in 2017. Three American presidents were impeached: Andrew Johnson, Bill Clinton and Donald Trump, Donald Trump was officially impeached two separate times by the house of representatives, but none were removed from office. President Richard Nixon resigned from the office of President before the House could impeach him, resulting in him being the only U.S. president to resign."}
{"id": "43563", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43563", "title": "Indictment", "text": "In common law, an indictment is a charge saying that a person committed a very serious crime. They used to be given out by grand juries (a special jury usually made up of 24 people that is used to see if a person should be charged), but many places do not have grand juries anymore. Sealed indictments are kept secret until they are unsealed."}
{"id": "43564", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43564", "title": "Trial", "text": "A trial is where two people or two groups of people argue in a court.\nCivil trial.\nIn a civil trial, there is a plaintiff and a defendant. The plaintiff tries to prove that he or she has a reason why the defendant needs to give him or her money.\nCriminal trial.\nIn a criminal trial, there is a prosecutor and a defendant. The prosecutor works for the government and tries to prove that the defendant committed a crime. It often takes a long time to get a trial scheduled as the courts can be very busy. In the United States, Federal court can take up to 10 months to get a court date. \nJudge.\nThe judge controls the courtroom. He or she decides who speaks when, and they decide what evidence and arguments can be used. Sometimes, a jury is brought in to determine whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty. If there is no jury, the judge or judges decide whether the defendant is proven guilty or not. If the defendant is proven guilty of the crime, the judge will decide the punishment, which is also called the \"sentence\". If the crime is serious, the defendant may go to prison or, in some countries, be executed. For smaller crimes, there is often a fine\u2014money that must be paid, in addition to having a criminal record.\nDifferences in each country.\nTrials are different in places where the laws are different. Different countries, cities and states all have different laws that change how trials happen. Trials in some places are very short. In some places, however, important trials can take as long as a few years while the two sides gather information and put together their arguments. "}
{"id": "43570", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43570", "title": "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone", "text": ""}
{"id": "43571", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43571", "title": "Stamp", "text": ""}
{"id": "43576", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43576", "title": "Belinda Peregr\u00edn", "text": "Belinda Peregrin Sch\u00fcll born (August 15, 1989 or 1992)A, is a Mexican singer and actress. She is often called just Belinda. Her first album, \"Belinda\" (2003), was very popular and sold over 1.1 million copies worldwide. Her second album \"Utop\u00eda\" (2006) gave her two Latin Grammy Award nominations.\nShe has also been in many movies, such as the Disney Channel Original Movie \"The Cheetah Girls 2\" (2006). She was also in the telenovela \"Camaleones\" (2009) and the TV series \"Mujeres asesinas 3\" (2010). After this, she released her third album \"Carpe Diem\" (2010), which had a hit single \"Ego\u00edsta\". Her fourth album \"Catarsis\" (2013) went straight to number one in Mexico.\nReferences.\nA According to Belinda's official websites, she was born in 1992. However, multiple sources mark \"1989\" as her birth year. "}
{"id": "43577", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43577", "title": "William-harvey", "text": ""}
{"id": "43578", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43578", "title": "Ngo Dinh Diem", "text": "Ngo Dinh Diem or Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m ( or ; 3 January 1901\u00a0\u2013 2 November 1963) was the first President of South Vietnam.\nUnlike most people in Vietnam, he was a Catholic. After he kept favoring people of his religion, he was overthrown and killed on 2 November 1963 by the South Vi\u1ec7tnamese army during the Buddhist crisis. The army then set up a military dictatorship."}
{"id": "43585", "revid": "7695491", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43585", "title": "Great Plague of London", "text": "During the Great Plague of London (1665-1666), the disease called the bubonic plague killed about 200,000 people in London, England. In seven months, almost one quarter of London's population (one out of every four Londoners) died from the plague. At its worst, in September of 1665, the plague killed 7,165 people in one week. After this, the number of people dying from the plague began to slow down. \nAround September of 1666, the great outbreak ended. The Great Fire of London, which happened on 2-6 September 1666, may have helped end the outbreak by killing many of the rats and fleas who were spreading the plague.\nThough most of the people who died during the Great Plague lived in London, the plague also killed people in other areas of England. By the time the Great Plague ended, about 2.5% of England's population had died from the plague. To compare, about 2% of the entire United Kingdom's population (including soldiers and civilians) died in World War I, and about 1% of the entire United Kingdom's population died in World War II.\nOutbreak.\nThe Great Plague of 1665 was the last major plague in England. Before the Great Plague, England had had outbreaks of plague (meaning many people got the disease) every few decades. For example:\nHistorians think the plague spread to England from the Netherlands. Dutch trading ships carrying cotton from Amsterdam may have brought the plague to England. Amsterdam was badly hit by the plague in 1663\u20131664; the disease killed about 50,000 people.\nIn London, the first places hit by the plague were the dock areas outside of the city and the parish of St Giles in the Fields. In these places, poor workers lived crowded together in bad conditions. Nobody kept records about the deaths of very poor people, so nobody knows how many of these people may have died from the plague. However, records say the first person to die of the plague in London was Rebecca Andrews, on 12 April 1665.\nThe plague hits London.\nBy July 1665, plague was in the city of London itself. Many of the people who could afford to leave the city left for the countryside. King Charles II of England, his family, and his court left the city for Oxfordshire. Most wealthy merchants and professionals left the city, so most businesses were closed. As the plague got worse, more and more people left. London got so empty that grass started to grow on the streets.\nHowever, most of the city's government officials stayed in London. So did the Lord Mayor of London, Sir John Lawrence. As the plague got worse, more and more people left, but a small number of clergymen, physicians and apothecaries chose to stay. Also, people who were too poor to move to the countryside had no choice but to stay in the city.\nSome of the people who stayed in London wrote about the Great Plague. Samuel Pepys's diary about living through the plague has given historians a lot of information about what the plague was like. Henry Foe, a saddler who lived in East London, also decided not to leave the city. Years later, in 1722, Foe's nephew Daniel Defoe wrote \"A Journal of the Plague Year\", a story about the plague, which he may have based on Foe's journals.\nReactions.\nPeople in London tried many different things to try to treat the plague and stop it from spreading. At the time, nobody understood what caused the plague, how it spread, or how to treat it.p.42 Antibiotic medications, which are the only treatment for plague, would not be discovered for another 300 years. People were so afraid of catching the plague from other people that they threw dead plague victims' bodies in overcrowded pits and buried them all together, as quickly as possible. In one parish in London, 1,114 dead plague victims were buried together in a hole that was fifty feet long and twenty feet wide.pp.174-175\nAs the plague got worse, people began to do worse things. Some people refused to help sick family members. Other people forced sick servants to leave, even though they had nowhere to go. Eventually, if one person in a home got the plague, the whole family was forced to stay in the home. A red cross and the words \"Lord have mercy upon us\" would be painted on the door. Samuel Pepys wrote in his diary: \"the plague [is] making us cruel as dogs to one another.\"\nGovernment officials tried several public health programs to prevent more people from getting the plague. For example:\n\"Plague doctors\" walked the streets diagnosing victims, although many of them were not actual doctors. Wearing special costumes, they tried to treat plague victims with bloodletting, frogs, and leeches.\nThough the plague was worst in London, it also affected other parts of England. Perhaps the most famous example was the village of Eyam in Derbyshire. Nobody knows for sure how the plague got to Eyam. However, stories say that a merchant carrying cloth from London accidentally brought the plague with him. The villagers quarantined themselves - kept themselves apart from other people and other villages - to make sure the disease would not spread any further. This kept the plague from spreading outside Eyam. However, about 80% of the people in Eyam died from the plague within a little over a year.\nThe plague dies out.\nAs time went on, more and more people died from the plague. This continued until the week of 19-26 September, 1665. This was the worst week of the Great Plague: 7,166 people died from the plague in that week. After that, the number of deaths from the plague began to slow down. By February 1666, the King and his court decided it was safe enough to return to London.\nSome people - though not nearly so many - continued to get the plague until September 1666. Around that time, the plague outbreak ended. The Great Fire of London is believed to have helped end the plague."}
{"id": "43586", "revid": "825927", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43586", "title": "Empress Matilda", "text": "Matilda 'the Empress' of England.\nF, #102037, b. circa August 1102, d. 10 September 1167\nLast Edited=7 Sep 2011\nConsanguinity Index=0.0%\n\u00a0 \u00a0 Matilda 'the Empress' of England was born circa August 1102 at Winchester, Hampshire, EnglandG.2 She was also reported to have been born on 7 February 1102 at England. She was the daughter of Henry I 'Beauclerc', King of England and Editha of Scotland. She married, firstly, Heinrich V, Holy Roman Emperor, son of Heinrich IV, Holy Roman Emperor, on 7 January 1114 at Mainz, Rheinland-Pfalz, GermanyG.2 She married, secondly, Geoffrey V Plantagenet, Comte d'Anjou et Maine, son of Fulk V d'Anjou, 9th Comte d'Anjou and Aremburga de la Fleche, Comtesse de Maine, on 22 May 1128 at Le Mans Cathedral, Le Mans, FranceG.3 She was also reported to have been married on 20 May 1127. She died on 10 September 1167 at Abbey of the Notre Dame des Pr\u00e9s, Rouen, Caux, FranceG.2 She was buried at Rouen Cathedral, Rouen, Caux, FranceG.2\n\u00a0 \u00a0 She was given the name of Adelaide at birth.2 After her marriage, Matilda 'the Empress' of England was styled as \"Empress Matilda of Germany\" on 7 January 1114.2 She gained the title of \"Lady of the English\" on 7 April 1141.2 She was deposed as Lady of the English on 1 November 1141.2 \n\u00a0 \u00a0 Daughter of Henry I and Editha of Scotland, she was nominated by her father as his successor. However, on the death of Henry I, the council considering a woman unfit to rule offered the throne to Stephen. Matilda invaded England and fought (1139 - 1148) to wrest rule from the usurping Stephen. She won much of the west, and after Stephen's capture in April 1141 a clerical council proclaimed Matilda 'Lady of the English'. She entered London but made cash demands that provoked Londoners to expel her before a coronation. On Stephen's release, she suffered defeats (fled from Oxford Castle Dec 1142), and eventually left England for Normandy, now controlled by her husband. The cause of her death is obscure. Although Matilda failed to secure the English throne, she laid a basis for successful claims by descendants of her husband Geoffrey of Anjou.\nCitations.\nEmpress Matilda (c. 7 February 1102\u201310 September 1167), sometimes called Empress Maud, was the second child of Henry I of England and Matilda of Scotland. Her brother, William Adelin, died in the wreck of the White Ship in 1120. This made Matilda the hereditary heir to the English throne. At her father's death in 1135, her cousin King Stephen rushed to take the throne. This led to a civil war between Stephen and Matilda, known as the Anarchy.\nShe was called \"empress\" because as a child she was married to Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor. She was Queen of England for a short time in 1141. The feud between Matilda and Stephen ended when Matilda's son, Henry, was named by Stephen as his successor. This was at the Treaty of Wallingford in 1153. Stephen's own chosen successor, his son Eustace, died in 1153."}
{"id": "43587", "revid": "5317", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43587", "title": "10 September", "text": ""}
{"id": "43591", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43591", "title": "King of Scots", "text": ""}
{"id": "43592", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43592", "title": "King of Scotland", "text": ""}
{"id": "43597", "revid": "768749", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43597", "title": "Kaiser", "text": "Kaiser was title used for the Emperor of Germany from the creation of unified Germany in 1871 until the end of World War I. The Holy Roman Emperor was also called \"Kaiser\". The word \"Kaiser\" is the German way to say Caesar, the name the ancient Romans used for their Roman Emperor, just as \"Tsar\" is the Russian way to say it."}
{"id": "43621", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43621", "title": "Orange, New South Wales", "text": "Orange is a city in New South Wales, Australia. It is on the Mitchell Highway about 250 kilometres west of Sydney. The main street (where people do all the shopping) is quite large for a country town. There are five high schools and five primary schools in Orange. Orange has two tennis centres, a big pool, an indoor sports centre, a netball centre, football pitches, a university, hockey pitches and lots of parks. There is also a big mine called Cadia and a big fun lake located outside of the town."}
{"id": "43627", "revid": "485156", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43627", "title": "Endometrium", "text": "The endometrium is the innermost membrane of the uterus. It sensitive to hormone changes. The endometrium is shed each month as menstrual flow. "}
{"id": "43632", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43632", "title": "Nibelungenlied", "text": "The Nibelungenlied, translated as The Song of the Nibelungs, is an epic poem in Middle High German. It tells the story of dragon-slayer Siegfried at the court of the Burgundians, and of the revenge of his wife Kriemhild, which leads to the death all the heroes of the Bugundians and of Kriemhild as well.\nThe saga of Siegfried was also used in the opera cycle \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" of Richard Wagner. Nibelung in this context means \"dwarf\".\nThe Nibelungenlied is based on earlier works. It was part of oral tradition, meaning it usually was not written down. During the Middle Ages people started to write down stories more and more. Overall there are about 35 German sources and one Dutch source for the story. There was an original manuscript but it has been lost. The three oldest manuscripts have been labelled \"A\", \"B\", and \"C\". \n\"B\" seems to be closest to the original; however, the real relation between the three manuscripts is unknown. The Nibelungenlied probably had a broad oral tradition, as there were many different versions. It is difficult to judge how these oral versions influenced the written ones.\nManuscripts A and B end with \"daz ist der Nibelunge not\" (that is the fall of the \"Nibelungs\"); for this reasons, they are known as the \"Not versions\". Manuscript C ends with \"daz ist der Nibelunge liet\" (). It is known as the \"Lied-version\". In total, the C text has been edited with regard to the public of the time. It is less dramatic. This probably made it more popular. Aesthetically, the B text would have been the greatest artistic achievement for a contemporary public.\nWho wrote it?\nThe author who wrote down the original that is now lost is unknown. However, there are a few candidates:\nSerious researchers tend to ignore the last three options, because there is not enough evidence to support them.\nThe well-known introduction.\nThis was probably not in the original though, but added later. The original probably began by introducing Kriemhild:\nOther websites.\nEnglish translations:"}
{"id": "43633", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43633", "title": "Dwarf (mythology)", "text": "A dwarf is a short, humanlike creature from Norse and Germanic mythologies. They have been used in many fairy tales, fantasy, fiction and role-playing games.\nIn some stories, dwarfs are mean, living under bridges, and having a bad reputation for stealing treasure. One example is the Norwegian Troll. It is an ugly and foolish creature who tells lies. It causes problems everywhere it goes. That is how the Internet troll got its name. In Robert Louis Stevenson's story, \"Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,\" Edward Hyde is described as \"a dwarf.\"\nOn the other hand, J. R. R. Tolkien's hobbits and the munchkins in The Wizard of Oz are likeable, honest, good and smart. "}
{"id": "43637", "revid": "3145", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43637", "title": "Schr\u00f6dingers cat", "text": ""}
{"id": "43642", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43642", "title": "Vanir", "text": "The Vanir are one of the two tribes of deities in Norse mythology, the other being the \u00c6sir. Native to Vanaheimr, the Vanir are peace-loving gods, associated with nature and fertility, while the \u00c6sir were chaotic and warlike. Members of the Vanir include:\nA number of them live in Asgard alongside the \u00c6sir as a token of goodwill following the war between the two tribes, which resulted in them uniting into a single pantheon. The goddess Freyja receives half of those slain in battle as a share of power between the two clans. "}
{"id": "43646", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43646", "title": "Mole (unit)", "text": "Mole is the SI unit used to measure how many molecules or atoms there are. One mole is around 600 sextillion molecules. Scientists use this number because 1 gram of hydrogen is around 1 mole of atoms.\nThe exact value of one mole is . This number comes from experiments with carbon because it's easy to work with.\n is also called Avogadro's number, which was named after the person who invented it.\nAnything can be measured in moles, but it is not practical for most tasks because the value is so massive. For example, one mole of grapefruits would be as big as the earth. \nBecause different molecules and atoms do not have the same mass, one mole of one thing does not weigh the same as one mole of something else. Atoms and molecule mass is measured in amu. One amu is equal to one gram per mole. This means that if an atom has a mass of one amu, one mole of this atom weighs one gram.\nMathematics with the mole.\nMoles = mass (g) / Relative mass (grams per mole)\nExample: How many moles are there in 20 grams of hydrogen?\nA value of 1 can be used for hydrogen's relative mass, although the correct value is slightly larger. So: moles = mass/relative mass = 20/1 = 20 moles.\nMoles = concentration (mol/dm3) x volume (dm3)\nExample: How many moles are there in 100cm3 of 0.1M H2SO4?\n1 dm3 is the same as 1000 cm3, so the value in cubic centimetres needs to be divided by 1000. 100/1000 x 0.1 = 0.01 moles.\nA methane molecule is made from one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms. Carbon has a mass of 12.011 u and hydrogen has a mass of 1.008 u. This means that the mass of one methane molecule is 12.011 u + (4 \u00d7 1.008u), or 16.043 u. This means that one mole of methane has a mass of 16.043 grams.\nA mole can be thought of as two bags of different sized balls. One bag contains 3 tennis balls and the other 3 footballs. There is the same number of balls in both bags but the mass of the footballs is much larger. It is a different way to measure things. Moles measure the number of particles, not the mass. So both bags contain three moles.\nA mole is simply a unit of the number of things. Other common units include a dozen, meaning\u00a0 12, and a score, meaning 20. Similarly, a mole refers to a specific quantity-- its distinguishing feature is that its number is far larger than other common units. Such units are typically invented when existing units can not describe something easily enough. Chemical reactions typically take place between molecules of varying weights, meaning measurements of mass (such as grams) can be misleading when compared the reactions of individual molecules. On the other hand, using the absolute number of atoms/molecules/ions would also be confusing, as the massive numbers involved would make it all too easy to misplace a value or drop a digit. As such, working in moles allows scientists to refer to a specific quantity of molecules or atoms without resorting to excessively large numbers.\nRelated units.\nThe SI units for molar concentration are mol/m3. However, most chemical writing uses mol/dm3, or mol dm-3, which is the same as mol/L. These units are often written with a capital letter M (pronounced \"molar\"), sometimes preceded by an SI prefix, for example, millimoles per litre (mmol/L) or millimolar (mM), micromoles/litre (\u00b5mol/L) or micromolar (\u00b5M), or nanomoles/L (nmol/L) or nanomolar (nM).\nThe absolute yield of a chemical reaction mostly stated in moles (called the \"molar yield\")."}
{"id": "43648", "revid": "5317", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43648", "title": "19 June", "text": ""}
{"id": "43651", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43651", "title": "Plesiosaurus", "text": "Plesiosaurus was a large fossil marine reptile, a genus in the order Plesiosauria. \nThe first specimen discovered by Mary Anning in 1820-21 was missing its skull. She found it on the 'Jurassic Coast' of Lyme Regis, Dorset, England. In 1823 she found another one, this time complete with its skull. The name \"Plesiosaurus\" was given by the Rev. William Conybeare.\n\"Plesiosaurus\" was a predator, living mostly on fish and belemnites. It would swim through schools of fish and use its long neck and sharp teeth to snap them up.\n\"Plesiosaurus\" was a fairly typical member of its order, and measured around 3 to 5 metres (10 to 16 ft) in total length. The snout was short, but the jaws were able to open very wide, and had a series of conical teeth in sockets. The neck was quite long, and the short tail was used for steering. Like all plesiosaurs, it used its large paddles to swim.\nOnly two species are known, and the genus existed for about 25 million years from the beginning of the Jurassic period.\nScientists have wondered whether ancient reptiles like pleisiosaurs were warm-blooded or cold-blooded. Scientists from the University of Plymouth studied many animals of different sizes from insects to whales that dive and hold their breath. They found that larger animals can hold their breath longer than smaller animals because they can store more oxygen. They also found this difference was much bigger for warm-blooded animals than for cold-blooded animals. They said this could be why whales became so large. They think since plesiosaurs were also large, like whales, they were more likely to be warm-blooded than cold-blooded.\nScientists also looked at the phosphate molecules inside plesiosaurs' teeth and saw the oxygen isotopes that suggested they had been warm-blooded."}
{"id": "43659", "revid": "7854371", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43659", "title": "Doraemon", "text": "Doraemon (\u30c9\u30e9\u3048\u3082\u3093) is a Japanese manga and anime series and franchise. It was written and illustrated by Fujiko Fujio and Kazuya Tsurumaki. It was started in a children\u2019s magazine in 1969. Doraemon is the name of a robot cat that came from the future to help a boy named Nobita Nobi. Doraemon is about the life of Nobita Nobi. In a typical story Doramon uses a gadget to solve a problem for Nobita, but Nobita goes too far and ends up being punished and learning a lesson.\nDoraemon was turned into an anime television show in 1979. It still is being shown on television. As of 1996, about 100 million comic books have been sold. A Japanese-to-English version of the original called \"Doraemon: Gadget Cat from the Future\" was published from 2002. A local translation is published in each Asian country such as Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea and Vietnam. It is in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia, but it is not as popular as it is in Asia. Doraemon is endorsed by 7-11 in Thailand as a mascot.\nCharacters.\nRecurring.\nApart from these, there are many characters like Nobita's mother, Nobita's father, Sensei, Mr. Kaminari (Mr. Rumbleton in US), etc.\nCharacters and Cast.\nDoraemon (April-September 1973).\n * Doraemon (voiced by K\u014dsei Tomita, from episode 1A to 13B)\n * Doraemon (voiced by Masako Nozawa, from Episode 14A to 26B)\n * Shizuka Minamoto (voiced by )\n * Shizuka Minamoto (voiced by Michiko Nomura)\n * Tamako Nobi (voiced by Endon Mahmood)\n * Tamako Nobi (voiced by Noriko Ohara)\n * Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by Ichir\u014d Murakoshi)\n * Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by )\n * Mrs. Honekawa (voiced by John Stocker)\n * Mrs. Honekawa (voiced by Kazue Takahashi)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by Sanji Hase)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by )\n * Sewashi Nobi (voiced by Keiko Yamamoto)\n * Sewashi Nobi (voiced by Sumiko Shirakawa)\n * Sewashi Nobi (voiced by Sachiko Chijimatsu)\n * Sewashi Nobi (voiced by )\n * Sensei (Teacher) (voiced by )\n * Sensei (Teacher) (voiced by Masashi Amenomori)\n * Gachako (voiced by Junko Hori\n * Gachako (voiced by John Stocker)\n * Botako (voiced by K\u014dsei Tomita)\n * Botako (voiced by Masako Nozawa)\n * Mr. Koike (voiced by Kaneta Kimotsuki)\n * Mr. Koike (voiced by Sukekiyo Kameyama)\n * Pregnant Mii-chan (voiced by Keiko Yokozawa)\n * Pregnant Mii-chan (voiced by Arlene Golonka)\nDoraemon (April 1979-March 2005).\n * Doraemon (voiced by Ichir\u014d Nagai, stand-in for \u014cyama)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by , stand-in for Ohara)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Shun Yashiro)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Sukekiyo Kameyama)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Y\u016b Mizushima)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Issei Futamata)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Takumi Yamazaki)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Nobuyuki Hiyama)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by )\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Naoki Tatsuta, stand-in for Kimotsuki)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Kaneta Kimotsuki)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Koreyoshi Kurahara)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by T\u014dru Furuya)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Naoki Tatsuta)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Keiji Fujiwara)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Shingo Katori)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Nobuyuki Hiyama)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Y\u016b Mizushima, stand-in for Tatekabe)\n * Shizuka Minamoto (voiced by Keiko Yokozawa, stand-in for Nomura)\n * Dorami (voiced by Yumiko Kobayashi)\n * Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by )\n * Hidetoshi Dekisugi (voiced by )\n * Teacher (voiced by Walker Boone)\n * Sensei (voiced by Ritsuo Sawa)\n * Teacher (voiced by Ritsuo Sawa)\n * Sensei (voiced by )\n * Teacher (voiced by )\n * Sensei (voiced by Kazuhiko Inoue)\n * Teacher (voiced by Kazuhiko Inoue)\n * Sensei (voiced by Ry\u014dichi Tanaka)\n * Teacher (voiced by Ry\u014dichi Tanaka)\n * Sewashi Nobi (voiced by Kazuyo Aoki)\n * Mrs. Minamoto (voiced by Keiko Yokozawa)\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by Stephen Chow)\n * Yoshio Minamoto (voiced by )\n * Yoshio Minamoto (voiced by Masaru Ikeda)\n * Yoshio Minamoto (voiced by Akira Kume)\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by )\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by Masaru Ikeda)\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by Akira Kume)\n * Mrs. Honekawa (voiced by Yoshino Ohtori)\n * Jaiko Goda (voiced by Kazuyo Aoki)\n * Jaiko (voiced by )\n * Jaiko (voiced by Kazuyo Aoki)\n * Mrs. Yamakawa (voiced by Junko Hori)\n * Mr. Yamakawa (voiced by )\n * Godzilla (performed by Keiji Fujiwara, from June 1996)\n * Godzilla (performed by Fumio Kuniyoshi, from September 2004)\n * Chinese Vampire (performed by Koreyoshi Kurahara, from July 2000)\n * Chinese Vampire (performed by Motoki Takagi, from October 2004)\n * Additional Characters (voiced by Hossan Leong)\n * Additional Characters (voiced by Denise Tan DJ)\n * Additional Characters (voiced by Gerald Chew)\n * Doraemon (voiced by Noah)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by British Actress)\n * Shizuka Minamoto (voiced by British Actress)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by )\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by )\n * Doraemon (voiced by Shingo Katori)\n * Nobita Nobi (portrayed by Yuri Chinen)\n * Adult Nobita Nobi (portrayed by Satoshi Tsumabuki)\n * Adult Shizuka Minamoto (portrayed by Yumi Kakazu)\n * Adult Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (portrayed by Fumio Kuniyoshi)\n * Adult Suneo Honekawa (portrayed by Tomokazu Seki)\n * Hidetoshi Dekisugi (portrayed by Subaru Kimura)\n * Hidetoshi Dekisugi (portrayed by Haruma Miura)\n * Adult Hidetoshi Dekisugi (portrayed by Haruma Miura)\n * Sewashi Nobi (portrayed by Subaru Kimura)\n * Sewashi Nobi (portrayed by Haruma Miura)\nDoraemon (April 2005-present).\n * Doraemon (voiced by Tomokazu Seki, stand-in for Mizuta)\n * Doraemon (voiced by , stand-in for Mizuta; in The Day Doraemon is Reborn &amp; Doraemon's Long Day)\n * Doraemon (voiced by Fuku Suzuki, stand-in for Mizuta; in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Doraemon (voiced by Iain Armitage, stand-in for Mizuta; in Stand by Me Doraemon 2)\n * Doraemon (voiced by Suleman octuplets, stand-in for Mizuta; in Stand by Me Doraemon 2)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by , stand-in for \u014chara; April-October 2005 &amp; October 2005-April 2007)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by Yoshiko Kamei, stand-in for \u014chara; April-October 2005 &amp; October 2005-April 2007)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by Xu Jiao, stand-in for \u014chara; April-October 2005 &amp; October 2005-April 2007)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by Yuri Chinen, stand-in for \u014chara; April-October 2005 &amp; October 2005-April 2007)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by , stand-in for \u014chara; October 2005-April 2007 &amp; May 2007-present)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by Haruka Tomatsu, stand-in for \u014chara; October 2005-April 2007 &amp; May 2007-present)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by , stand-in for \u014chara; in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by Japanese Child Actor, stand-in for \u014chara; August 2014)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by Japanese Actress, stand-in for \u014chara; August-September 2014)\n * Nobita Nobi (voiced by Abby Ryder Fortson, stand-in for \u014chara; in Stand by Me Doraemon 2)\n * Shizuka Minamoto (voiced by Dong Jie, in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Fumio Kuniyoshi, in 2012 Movie)\n * Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Fergus Craig, in 2012 Movie)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by , in 2012 Movie)\n * Suneo Honekawa (voiced by , in 2012 Movie)\n * Dorami (voiced by Ry\u014d Hirohashi)\n * Dorami (voiced by Yumiko Kobayashi)\n * Tamako Nobi (voiced by Miki Narahashi, stand-in for Mitsuishi; April 2005-April 2007)\n * Tamako Nobi (voiced by Minami Takayama, stand-in for Mitsuishi; April 2005-April 2007 &amp; May 2007-present)\n * Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by Stephen Chow, stand-in for Matsumoto; April 2005-April 2007)\n * Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by Satoshi Tsumabuki, stand-in for Matsumoto; April 2005-April 2007 &amp; May 2007-present)\n * Young Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by Yumiko Kobayashi)\n * Young Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by Masako Nozawa, in 2012 Movie)\n * Young Nobisuke Nobi (voiced by Nobuyuki Hiyama, in 2012 Movie)\n * Hidetoshi Dekisugi (voiced by Fujiko Takimoto)\n * Hidetoshi Dekisugi (voiced by , stand-in for Hagino; May 2005-March 2006)\n * Hidetoshi Dekisugi (voiced by Yoshiko Kamei, stand-in for Hagino; May 2005-March 2006)\n * Teacher (voiced by Wataru Takagi)\n * Sensei (voiced by Subaru Kimura)\n * Teacher (voiced by Subaru Kimura)\n * Kaminari (voiced by Katsuhisa H\u014dki)\n * Mr. Kaminari (voiced by Subaru Kimura)\n * Kaminari (voiced by Subaru Kimura)\n * Sewashi Nobi (voiced by )\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by Aruno Tahara)\n * Yoshio Minamoto (voiced by Mahito Ohba)\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by Mahito Ohba)\n * Yoshio Minamoto (voiced by Stephen Chow, from July 2005 &amp; Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by Stephen Chow, from July 2005 &amp; Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Yoshio Minamoto (voiced by , in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by , in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Yoshio Minamoto (voiced by , in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Shizuka's Papa (voiced by , in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Mrs. Honekawa (non-speaking by Yumiko Kobayashi, Only in All the Way From the Country of the Future)\n * Mrs. Honekawa (voiced by Wataru Takagi, Crying in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by Stephen Chow, from June 2005-April 2012)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by Haruma Miura, from June 2005-April 2012)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by , from June 2005-April 2012)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by , from June 2005-April 2012)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by Huang Lei, from August 2014-July 2015)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by Y\u016b Mizushima, in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Mr. Honekawa (non-speaking by Yumiko Kobayashi, Only in 2017 Movie)\n * Mr. Honekawa (voiced by Jackie Chan, Crying in Doradora Ponpoko Major Investigation)\n * Sunetsugu Honekawa (voiced by Wasabi Mizuta, in All the Way From the Country of the Future and Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Sunetsugu Honekawa (voiced by Y\u016b Mizushima, from June-July 2007)\n * Sunetsugu Honekawa (voiced by , from August 2007-May 2009)\n * Sunetsugu Honekawa (voiced by , from August 2007-May 2009)\n * Sunetsugu Honekawa (voiced by Fuku Suzuki, in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Sunetsugu Honekawa (voiced by Tomokazu Seki, from July 2015)\n * Sunekichi Honekawa (voiced by Kazuya Tsurumaki, in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Sunekichi Honekawa (voiced by Mitsuaki Madono, in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Sunekichi Honekawa (voiced by Ben Bocquelet, in Doraemon's Long Day, Debut of a New Song! Gian, The Great?, Tanuki Maker, &amp; Doradora Ponpoko Major Investigation)\n * Sunekichi Honekawa (voiced by , Screaming in Tanuki Maker &amp; Doradora Ponpoko Major Investigation)\n * Mrs. Goda (voiced by , from April 2005-July 2007)\n * Mrs. Goda (voiced by , in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Mrs. Goda (voiced by Ryutaro Nonomura, in Stand by Me Doraemon 1)\n * Sasuke Goda (voiced by )\n * Jaiko (voiced by Vanilla Yamazaki)\n * Jaiko Goda (voiced by , in Debut of a New Song! Gian, The Great?)\n * Jaiko (voiced by , in Debut of a New Song! Gian, The Great?)\n * Young Nobirou Nobi (voiced by Japanese Actress)\n * Tamao Kataoka (voiced by Satoshi Tsumabuki, stand-in for Sakurai)\n * Goro Nobi (voiced by Justin Fletcher)\n * Moteo Mote (voiced by )\n * Moteo Mote (voiced by Nobuyuki Hiyama)\n * Moteo Mote (voiced by Shin'ichiro Miki)\n * Homeless Guy (voiced by Y\u016b Mizushima)\n * Homeless Guy (voiced by )\n * Homeless Guy (voiced by Mitsuaki Madono)\n * Homeless Guy (voiced by Toshiyuki Morikawa)\n * Kazuya Tsurumaki (voiced by Toshiyuki Morikawa)\n * Chinese Vampire (preformed by Frank Welker, from May 2008)\n * Jason Voorhees (preformed by Frank Welker, from August 2007)\n * Pregnant Dragon (preformed by Kazumi Totaka, from May 2008)\n * Godzilla (preformed by Motoki Takagi, from October 2008)\n * Pawaemon (voiced by Akira Kubodera, in The Day Doraemon is Reborn, Battle! Cat-Model Robots vs. Dog-Model Robots, &amp; Move Fast, Doraemon! The Galactic Grandprix)\n * Pawaemon (voiced by Haruma Miura, in The Day Doraemon is Reborn, Battle! Cat-Model Robots vs. Dog-Model Robots, &amp; Move Fast, Doraemon! The Galactic Grandprix)\n * Nobisuke (voiced by Megumi \u014chara)\n * Nobisuke (voiced by )\n * Adult Nobita Nobi (voiced by )\n * Adult Nobita Nobi (voiced by Fumio Kuniyoshi)\n * Adult Nobita Nobi (voiced by Damien Laquet)\n * Adult Nobita Nobi (voiced by Justin Fletcher)\n * Adult Nobita Nobi (voiced by Subaru Kimura)\n * Adult Nobita Nobi (voiced by Satoshi Tsumabuki)\n * Nobita's grandmother (voiced by Wasabi Mizuta)\n * Nobita's grandmother (voiced by Vanilla Yamazaki)\n * Nobiru Nobi (voiced by Kazuya Tsurumaki)\n * Nobiru Nobi (voiced by Fumio Kuniyoshi)\n * Robot Nobita Nobi (voiced by Subaru Kimura, in Move Fast, Doraemon! The Galactic Grandprix)\n * Robot Nobita Nobi (voiced by , stand-in for \u014chara; in Move Fast, Doraemon! The Galactic Grandprix)\n * Robot Nobita Nobi (voiced by Haruka Tomatsu, stand-in for \u014chara; in Move Fast, Doraemon! The Galactic Grandprix)\n *Doraemon (voiced by Leonard Nimoy)\n *Doraemon (voiced by Justin Long)\n *Nobita Nobi (voiced by Jesse McCartney)\n *Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Justin Long)\n *Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Matthew Gray Gubler)\n *Dorami (voiced by Colleen Villard)\n *Mr. Honekawa (voiced by Joe J. Thomas)\n *Nobita Nobi (voiced by Anthony Field)\n *Jaiko Goda (voiced by Heather Pennington)\n *Tamako Nobi (voiced by Catherine Fu)\n *Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Frank Welker)\n *Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Justin Fletcher)\n *Suneo Honekawa (voiced by )\n *Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Haruma Miura)\n *Sewashi Nobi (voiced by Anthony Field)\n *Doraemon (voiced by Wong Wai Kay)\n *Nobita Nobi (voiced by Ryan Lee Bhaskaran)\n *Shizuka Minamoto (voiced by Denise Camillia Tan)\n *Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by )\n *Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Wong Wai Kay)\n *Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Alex Wong Wai Pang)\n *Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Muhammad Abdurrahman Solahuddin)\n *Hidetoshi Dekisugi (voiced by )\n *Moteo Mote (voiced by Wong Wai Kay)\n *Shizuka Minamoto (voiced by Nikki Whitaker)\n *Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Lance Thirtyacre)\n *Takeshi \"Gian\" Goda (voiced by Chris Netherton)\n *Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Lovell Stanton)\n *Suneo Honekawa (voiced by Chris Netherton)"}
{"id": "43660", "revid": "1103576", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43660", "title": "Alfred the Great", "text": "Alfred the Great (c. 849 - 26 October899) was King of Wessex from 871 to 899. He was the first monarch from the British Isles to style himself as 'King of the Anglo-Saxons' and so he is sometimes considered the first English king. Alfred started the Royal Navy in the 9th century\nEarly childhood.\nAlfred was the youngest son of King \u00c6thelwulf of Wessex and Osburga. She was the daughter of Osburga, Athelwulf's butler. Alfred was born in 849 in the royal village of Wantage then in Berkshire. In the world he grew up in there was constant talk and fear of Viking raiders. For fourteen years they had been raiding but a year after Alfred's birth they remained all winter. The Viking menace was now settled on the island of Thanet in Kent.\nWhen he was about four, Alfred's mother, Osburga, died. At age twelve, Alfred had difficulty finding a qualified teacher to help him learn to read and write. He finally overcame the problem and learned to read and write by using the writings of the church. At some point in his childhood Alfred was made a (a high rank in Anglo-Saxon England styled on the Roman office of consul). The ceremony involved him receiving a red cloak, a jeweled belt and a sword. This ceremony meant he was not destined to join the church, as the younger sons typically were. His life as an adult would be as a nobleman and possibly, if he survived his four older brothers, as king, someday.\nBefore he was seven years old, he had traveled to Rome twice. In 853, Alfred was sent with an escort and met Pope Leo IV. In 855 King \u00c6thelwulf traveled to Rome taking his young son Alfred with him. They stayed in Rome a year and returned through France. There, king \u00c6thelwulf and his son Alfred stayed at the court of Charles the Bald. \u00c6thelwulf became engaged to Charles's eldest daughter, Judith, then about aged twelve. That same October, they were married at Verberie in northern France.\nSuccession.\nWhile Alfred and his father were in Rome and France, 855-856, his older brother Athelstan had died. On the king's return his son Ethelbald, with his followers. was threatening a civil war. To prevent this from happening \u00c6thelwulf stepped down as king. He gave the rule over Wessex to his son Ethelbald. He took over the rule of Kent, Essex, Sussex and Surrey ruling Wessex as the under-king with his child bride Judith sharing his throne. In 858 king \u00c6thelwulf died.\nEthelbald, now the undisputed king, next did the unexpected. He married his and Alfred's stepmother Judith. According to Asser, all men in England were horrified. Two years later in 860, Ethelbald was dead. Alfred's third brother, Ethelbert, succeeded to the throne. He united all of Wessex into one kingship. Queen Judith sold all of her extensive holdings in England and returned to France.\nThe next brother to rule Wessex was Ethelbert. In the same year he succeeded his brother there was a great Viking raid on the south coast of England. The Vikings plundered Winchester the chief city of Wessex and obtained a great deal of . As they returned to their ships they were ambushed by Anglo-Saxons from Hampshire and Berkshire. A few survived and returned to their ships. For the next three years Southern England was free of Viking raids. But the year 865 saw the arrival of the Great Heathen Army in East Anglia. For a time they were more interested in Northumbria. They gained control of York and moved south into Mercia then made their winter camp in Nottingham.\nMeanwhile, King Ethelbert died in early 866. So far all the brothers had been childless and so the succession was passed from brother to brother. The fourth brother in line was Ethelred. He became king in 866. It was at this time Alfred was given the title of \"Secundarius\" (Latin for secondary). In effect it meant he was given regal power over part of the kingdom or limited joint authority over the entire kingdom. in 868 Burgred, the King of Mercia, asked King Ethelred and Alfred for their help against the Danes (Vikings). But their forces together could not defeat the Danes. By 871 the Mercians and East Anglians had been defeated. Only Wessex could mount an army against the Vikings. That year Wessex was invaded by a large Danish army. After many battles the Anglo-Saxons were able to slow the Danes' progress. Ethelred died. He left a young son named Ethelwald who later rebelled against Edward the Elder.\nKing of Wessex.\nAlfred became king in the middle of this conflict. But before the end of the year he succeeded in effecting a peace, probably by paying a sum of money to the invaders.\nAlfred earned the name 'the Great' by defending the kingdom from Viking invasions. Alfred was a scholar and encouraged education in the kingdom as well as improving the legal system.\nKing of the Anglo-Saxons.\nBy the close of the ninth century the four independent kingdoms of England had been reduced to just one. Wessex was the only remaining kingdom not destroyed by the Vikings. Beginning about 886 Alfred claimed to be the king of all the English. The exception was those parts of England that were under Danish rule. This was the beginning of unifying England under a single king. For many Alfred was the first king of the English. But he did not technically rule all of England. That distinction was given to Athelstan (ruled 924\u2013939). King Ethelstan was Alfred's eldest grandson.\nIn the 880s Alfred formed a marriage alliance with Mercia, still a powerful kingdom. his daughter, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, married king \u00c6thelred, of Mercia. After his death Ethelflaeda ruled as Queen of Mercia.\nBy 890 Alfred was making literacy among his people a priority. There were still Viking attacks and Alfred was still telling his people to continue fighting and not give up. Alfred died in 899. He was succeeded by his son, Edward the Elder who was crowned on (8 June) 900.\nFamily.\nIn 868 Alfred married Ealhswith, daughter of Ethelred, surnamed Mucill, Ealdorman of the Gainas. Together they had several children:"}
{"id": "43661", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43661", "title": "Festival", "text": "A festival is a gathering of people to celebrate something. It can also refer to a one day or more when people in a country have a holiday so that they can celebrate something. Festivals may be religious or national. They also may be events which feature different cultural programs such as music, dancing, poetry, movies, etc."}
{"id": "43670", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43670", "title": "Oort cloud", "text": "The Oort cloud, or \u00d6pik\u2013Oort cloud, is a cloud of comets and other objects. Astronomers believe it is way beyond the orbits of Pluto and the Kuiper belt. The Oort cloud is believed to be the source of long-period comets in the Solar System.\nThe Oort cloud may lie about 50,000 AU, or nearly a light-year, from the Sun. This means the cloud is nearly a quarter of the way to Proxima Centauri, the nearest star to the Sun. \nThe Kuiper belt and scattered disc, the other two reservoirs of trans-Neptunian objects, are less than one thousandth of the Oort cloud's distance. The outer limit of the Oort cloud defines the boundary of the Solar System and the region of the Sun's gravitational dominance.\nThe Dutch astronomer Jan Hendrik Oort published the Oort cloud idea in 1950. The Oort cloud was named after him, as were the Oort comet, and Oort constants.\nStructure.\nThe Oort cloud takes up a lot of space and is thought to have trillions of comets about tens of millions of kilometers apart. \nThe Oort cloud is made up of an inner Oort cloud and an outer Oort cloud. The outer cloud is weakly bound to the Sun; long-term comets are thought to come from there. The Inner cloud is also called the Hills cloud and may be the maker of comets.\nThe objects in the Oort cloud are believed to consist of much ice. Since the object 1996 PW was found to be a rocky body in an orbit typical of long-period comets, it is believed that rocky objects might be in the Oort cloud. \nOrigins.\nThe Oort cloud is thought to be the remains of a disk made out of gas which surrounded the Sun long ago."}
{"id": "43686", "revid": "6977387", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43686", "title": "Dynasty", "text": "Dynasty means rulers who belong to the same royal family for generations. The term is also used to describe the era during which that family ruled.\nFamous dynasties were: "}
{"id": "43690", "revid": "62069", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43690", "title": "Han dynasty", "text": "The Han dynasty came to power in 202 B.C. They followed the philosophies of Confucianism and legalism. This was called 'the Han synthesis'.\nUnder this dynasty, China made progress in arts and science. The empire also became larger and larger. China started trading with a number of other countries. They started the Silk Road. Merchants used the Silk Road to reach China. During this dynasty Buddhism was introduced in China. Today, the dominant ethnic group of China calls themselves the Han Chinese since this was the dynasty where many of the norms of Chinese culture found a firm foundation in the culture, including Confucianism and Traditional Chinese characters. The first emperor of the han dynasty is Liu Bang, known in Chinese as Emperor Gaozu of Han.\nThe Han dynasty ruled China from 206 B.C. to 220 A.D. The new emperor maintained a legalist ideology just like the Qin dynasty but also had ideas of Confucianism to have a centralized system showing benevolence. After eighty years, Emperor Wu of Han launched a period of military expansion. The Han armies controlled many territories, including Silk Road in Mongolia and Xinjiang. The Silk Road \u00a0helped make a political, economic, military, and culture center, but it was very expensive to manage and further expansion was cut off. \u00a0Several factors contributed to the fall of the Han dynasty, including uprisings of desperate and hungry people, the spread of attacks by nomadic groups, and official corruption.\nMost of the people of China are Han Chinese. The name comes from the Han Dynasty. \nLiterature.\nFairbank, John King and Merle Goldman 1992. \"China: a new history\". 2nd enlarged edition 2006. Cambridge: MA; London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. "}
{"id": "43693", "revid": "970178", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43693", "title": "Zhou Dynasty", "text": "The Zhou Dynasty replaced the Shang Dynasty in 1046 BCE. The kings of this dynasty made the empire a lot bigger. For the first time in the history of China, many people began moving to far away places inside the empire. The Zhou rulers moved the capital from Henan to a place near present-day Xi'an, near the Yellow River. The Zhou Dynasty also brought the theory of the Mandate of Heaven. This theory said that the fact that rulers were in charge proved that the gods wanted them to be in charge. Almost all dynasties of Chinese rulers after the Zhou continued to believe this theory.\nMature Chinese philosophy developed during the Zhou Dynasty. The greatest Chinese philosophers were \"Kong Fuzi\" (Latin: Confucius), founder of Confucianism, and Laozi, founder of Daoism. Other philosophers, theorists, and schools of thought from the Zhou Dynasty were Mozi (Latin: Micius), founder of \"Mohism\", Mengzi (Latin: Mencius), a famous Confucian who expanded upon Kong Fuzi's legacy, Shang Yang and Han Feizi, responsible for the development of \"ancient Chinese\" Legalism (the core philosophy of the Qin Dynasty), and Xunzi."}
{"id": "43694", "revid": "7833031", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43694", "title": "Tony Iommi", "text": "Frank Anthony \"Tony\" Iommi (born 19 February 1948, in Birmingham, England) is a British guitarist and songwriter. He is most famous for starting the heavy metal band Black Sabbath. He is the only person who has stayed a member of the band since it began in 1968. He lost two finger tips in a work accident, and made two fake finger tips from a plastic bottle. This helped give Black Sabbath their heavy sound.\nIn 2003, Iommi was listed at number 86 in Rolling Stone Magazine's \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" issue.\nAlong with Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin, Iommi is oft considered one of the greatest riff writers of all time. Iommi used several riffs in Black Sabbath's songs.\nHe was born to an Italian immigrant family and has dual Italian British citizenship. \nIn 2006 Tony Iommi was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame."}
{"id": "43695", "revid": "793", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43695", "title": "Tintin", "text": ""}
{"id": "43698", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43698", "title": "Yellow River", "text": "The Yellow River (Hu\u00e1ng H\u00e9 \u9ec4\u6cb3) is the second longest river in China (after Yangtze River) and the sixth longest in the world. The river is 5464\u00a0km long and it drains at the Bohai Sea, a gulf of the Yellow Sea. The river is often called the \"Mother River of China\" and \"the Cradle of the Chinese civilization\" in China. In Chinese mythology, the river is home to the deity Hebo."}
{"id": "43700", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43700", "title": "Northern Territory (Australia)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43705", "revid": "766335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43705", "title": "Rebellion", "text": "A rebellion is when people refuse to obey orders and fight against authority. Those who do this are \"rebels\". They may be citizens of a country who try to take over the government by force because they do not trust the current system. Some rebels in history were slaves who fought back against their masters or against slavery in general. Leader of slave rebellions include Spartacus and Nat Turner.\nAn example would be the Zhou dynasty in China who made the rulers of other Chinese states that they captured live with their own families in the Zhou capital, Anyang. However, they failed to stop rebellion this way because it brought together groups of lords who might rebel under their control. The Zhou dynasty declined because other lords that were ruling parts of China rebelled.\nRebellion is a usual method of secession. "}
{"id": "43710", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43710", "title": "List of French monarchs", "text": "Ruled from the start of the Frankish Kingdom in 486 to 1870. During most of its history, France was ruled by kings. Four Carolingian monarchs were also Roman Emperors and the Bonapartes were Emperors of the French.\nThis article lists all rulers to have held the title \"King of Franks\", \"King of France\", \"King of the French\" or \"Emperor of the French\".\nThe title \"King of the Franks\" was in use until the reign of Philip II. During the short time when the French Constitution of 1791 was in effect (1791\u20131792) and after the July Revolution in 1830, the style \"King of the French\" was used instead of \"King of France (and Navarre)\".\nIn addition to the Kingdom of France, there were also two French Empires. The First French Empire was from 1804\u20131815. It was founded and ruled by Napoleon I. The Second French Empire was from 1852\u20131870. It was founded and ruled by his nephew Napoleon III Then 3rd 4th and 5th republic formed\nMerovingian Dynasty (428\u2013751).\nThe name of France comes from the Germanic tribe known as the Franks. The Merovingian kings began as chieftains. The oldest known was Chlodio. Clovis I was the first of these to rise to true kingship. After his death, his kingdom was split between his sons into Soissons (Neustria), Paris, Orl\u00e9ans (Burgundy), and Metz (Austrasia). Several Merovingian monarchs brought back together the Frankish kingdoms and took the title of \"King of the Franks\". But upon their deaths, according to Frankish custom, the kingdom would often be split once again between their sons.\nThe last Merovingian kings, known as the lazy kings (rois fain\u00e9ants), did not hold any real political power. The Mayor of the Palace governed instead. When Theuderic IV died in 737, Mayor of the Palace Charles Martel left the throne vacant and continued to rule until his own death in 741. His sons Pepin and Carloman briefly brought back the Merovingian dynasty by raising Childeric III to the throne in 743. In 751, Pepin deposed Childerich and took the throne.\nCarolingian Dynasty (751\u2013987).\nThree of the twelve kings during the 147-year Carolingian Dynasty \u2013 Odo, his brother Robert I and Robert's son in law Raoul/Rudolph \u2013 were not from the Carolingian Dynasty but from the rival Robertian Dynasty. The Robertian Dynasty became the Capetian Dynasty with when Hugh Capet took the throne in 987.\nCapetian Dynasty (987\u20131792).\nThe Capetian Dynasty, the male-line descendants of Hugh Capet, ruled France from 987 to 1792 and again from 1814 to 1848. The branches of the dynasty which ruled after 1328 are generally called Valois and Bourbon.\nDirect Capetians (987\u20131328).\n\"Not listed above are Hugh Magnus, eldest son of Robert II, and Philip of France, eldest son of Louis VI. Both were co-Kings with their fathers but died before them. Because neither Hugh nor Philip were sole or senior king in their own lifetimes, they are usually not listed as Kings of France.\"\nHouse of Bourbon (1589\u20131792).\n\"From 21 January 1793 to 8 June 1795, Louis XVI's son Louis-Charles was titled King of France as Louis XVII. In reality, he was imprisoned in the Temple during this time. His power was held by the leaders of the Republic. On Louis XVII's death, his uncle Louis-Stanislas claimed the throne, as Louis XVIII. He was only \"de facto\" King of France in 1814.\"\nFirst Republic (1792\u20131804).\n\"The First French Republic lasted from 1792 to 1804, when its First Consul, Napoleon Bonaparte, declared himself Emperor of the French.\"\nHouse of Bourbon (1815\u20131830).\n\"The elder son of Charles X, the Dauphin Louis-Antoine, is sometimes said to have legally been the King of France as Louis XIX. This is in the 20\u00a0minutes between Charles X's formal signature of abdication and the Dauphin's own signature.\"&lt;br&gt;\n\"Henri d'Artois, Charles X's grandson, is said by monarchists to be the King of France, as Henry V from 2 August 1830 to 9 August 1830. He was never recognized by the French State. He is generally not in lists of official French monarchs.\"\nThere was a brief period (20 March 1815 to 8 July 1815) called the Hundred Days in which Louis XVIII was king somewhat before the time, but fled because of Napoleon I's return from Elba\nSecond Republic (1848\u20131852).\n\"The Second French Republic lasted from 1848 to 1852, when its president, Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, was declared Emperor of the French.\"\nHeads of State following 1871.\nThe chronology of Head of State of France continues with the Presidents of France. There were short term periods by the Chief of State of the French State (1940\u20131944), the Chairman of the Provisional Government of the French Republic (1944\u20131946) and the President of the French Senate (1969 and 1974) during the Fifth Republic."}
{"id": "43712", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43712", "title": "Battle", "text": "A battle is a fight between two or more groups where each group is trying to defeat (beat) the others. Battles are most often fought during wars. A small battle fought by only a small part of the armies is called a skirmish. Series of battles are called military campaigns. The ground on which a battle is fought is called a battlefield.\nBattles can very important, for example the 1389 Battle of Kosovo, which was a draw in military terms, and the 1798 Battle of the Nile which the French lost, changed the history of Europe and the world. "}
{"id": "43713", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43713", "title": "Device", "text": "Device could mean:\nDevise could also mean:\nOr see the placename Devizes"}
{"id": "43714", "revid": "1053305", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43714", "title": "Edward IV of England", "text": "Edward IV of England was a king of England. He was born on April 28, 1442. He was King of England from March 4, 1461 until his death on April 9, 1483.\nEdward was the eldest of the four sons of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York. The Duke of York was a very powerful man, and had a claim to the throne of England. He became more popular than the existing king, Henry VI of England, who was thought to be weak. When the duke tried to take the throne from Henry VI, the Wars of the Roses broke out. By the time Edward was eighteen, he and his brother Edmund, Earl of Rutland, who was seventeen, were old enough to take part in the fighting, and Edward turned out to be a very good soldier. He was helped by Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick, a clever nobleman who fought for the Duke of York. At the Battle of Wakefield in 1460, Edward's father, and his brother Edmund, were both killed. As his father's heir, he now claimed the throne. In March 1461, he entered London with his army and was crowned king, although he was only nineteen. King Henry VI was put into prison.\nFor a while, Edward ruled the country well, with help from the Earl of Warwick. Then Edward met a woman called Elizabeth Woodville, whom he wanted to marry. The Earl of Warwick did not know about their romance, and he wanted King Edward to marry a foreign princess in order to make an alliance with another country, which would have made his position stronger. Elizabeth and Edward got married secretly in about 1464, and they had ten children in the nineteen years of their marriage. \nWhen the Earl of Warwick learned of Edward's marriage, he was angry. He grew even more angry as time went on, because Elizabeth's family became powerful and the king no longer respected Warwick as he had done in the beginning. In 1459 he rebelled against the king, with help from another of Edward's younger brothers, George, Duke of Clarence; George was married to the Earl of Warwick's elder daughter, Isabel. The rebels went to France and made an alliance with Queen Margaret, who was the wife of King Henry VI. The Earl of Warwick managed to defeat King Edward in battle in 1471, and freed King Henry VI from prison. Henry was now king again, and Edward had to escape to Burgundy, while his wife and children went into hiding. \nThe Duke of Burgundy was married to Edward's sister Margaret, so he was willing to help raise more troops. When Edward returned to England, he defeated the Earl of Warwick in battle and killed him. Shortly afterwards, Queen Margaret and her son arrived in England. They were also defeated in battle by King Edward, and his throne was safe. To make sure of this, Edward arranged for King Henry VI to be killed.\nWhile Edward was away in Burgundy, his wife Elizabeth had given birth to a son, Edward, who was given the title of Prince of Wales. He would be the next king. Edward ruled with help from his two brothers. George, who had once rebelled against him, was now loyal, and the youngest brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, had always been loyal. There were still quarrels between them and the powerful Woodville family. George and Richard also quarrelled with each other, and in the end King Edward had to put George in prison, where he died.\nEdward IV died very suddenly at the age of forty. His son became King Edward V of England, but his reign did not last long. Edward's brother, Richard, thought that it would not be a good idea for a boy to be king, and he took the throne himself. No one really knows what happened to Edward's two sons, the Princes in the Tower.\nPopularity.\nHe was seen as a strong and popular king, he was also tall at 6\"4 (194cm) which was very tall for a man in the 15th century, his height as a tall monarch was passed only by Peter I of Russia who was 6\"8 (203cm)"}
{"id": "43717", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43717", "title": "Seismosaurus", "text": ""}
{"id": "43718", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43718", "title": "Pterosaur", "text": "Pterosaurs were flying reptiles which lived in the Mesozoic era at the same time as the dinosaurs. \nMany pterosaurs were fairly small, but in the Upper Cretaceous some grew larger than any other flying animals. The pterosaur \"Quetzalcoatlus\" had a wing-span of up to 12 metres (~40 feet).\nThe first fossils occur in the Upper Triassic, and the group continues until the K/T extinction event at the end of the Cretaceous (220 to 65.5 million years ago). Pterosaurs are the earliest vertebrates known to have evolved powered flight. Their wings were made from a flap of skin between their bodies and a big fourth finger (sometimes called the \"wing finger\"). The pterosaurs fall into two groups. The earlier Rhamphorhynchoids (e.g. \"Rhamphorhynchus\") had long tails and toothed jaws; The pterodactyloids (e.g. \"Pterodactylus\") had short tails, and many had beaks with no teeth.\nThe first pterosaur fossil was discovered in the Late Jurassic Solnhofen limestone in Germany in 1784. This was exactly the same place as \"Archaeopteryx\" was found years later. Georges Cuvier first suggested that pterosaurs were flying creatures in 1801. Since the first pterosaur fossil was found, twenty-nine species of pterosaurs have been found in those deposits alone. A famous early UK find was an example of \"Dimorphodon\" by Mary Anning, in 1828 at Lyme Regis, Dorset, England. The name Pterosauria was coined in 1834.\nPterosaurs were genuine fliers, able to flap or soar. Their bodies were covered with fine hairs, so they were able to regulate their temperature (they were warm-blooded). They are a close sister-group to the dinosaurs, part of the Archosauria.\nRhamphorhynchoids.\nThis early group did well from the Upper Triassic to the Lower Cretaceous. When we first see them in the fossil record they have developed three families, so biologists know their early evolution is not yet revealed.p240, 246 These three families are represented by the three genera \"Rhamphorhynchus\", \"Dimorphodon\" and \"Eudimorphodon\". At least one more family appears at the start of the Jurassic, the Anurognathidae.\nThe group had a long tail, usually stiffened by rod-like bony tendons to keep it straight. This shows that their flight was extremely stable, which means it kept on course, rather than darted about. This feature is also found in \"Archaeopteryx\" and in early bats, and in insects like dragonflies.\nTo understand this, it helps to know some basic things about flight aerodynamics and stability. Early planes were highly stable, and so are airliners. To dart about quickly requires special advanced brains and reflexes, which later birds and pterosaurs had, but early ones did not. The analogy in planes would be fighter planes, which need such fast reactions that the details are worked out by computer, with the pilot indicating where to go. It requires more brains to control unstable flight than it does stable flight.\nAll species in the group have teeth. This again has a parallel with birds; \"Archaeopteryx\" and many Cretaceous birds have teeth; modern birds do not. The disadvantage of teeth is that they are quite heavy; when the animal can do without them, they will gradually get selected out. Obviously, without teeth food cannot be chewed, but there are ways around that. Stones in the gizzard do the grinding in birds.\nFor a long time it was thought that the group died out at the end of the Jurassic, which was a minor extinction event. Even near the end of the Jurassic, \"Rhamphorhynchus\" was the most common pterosaur found at the famous \"Archaeopteryx\" site at Solnhofen in Bavaria, Germany, and now it is known that the group survived until the Lower Cretaceous. \"Until recently, it was thought that rhamphorhynchoids died out at the end of the Jurassic, but new finds in the Jehol sequence of northeast China [show] that in this part of the world they survived until at least the middle of the Lower Cretaceous\".\nA single specimen of the insect-eating \"Anurognathus\" was also found at Solnhofen. It had a shorter tail than any other rhamphorhynchoid. This suggests its need to dodge about to catch insects: \"agile and highly manoeuvrable\".p270\nPterodactyloids.\nFossil pterodactyloids appear in the Upper Jurassic. They were short-tailed pterosaurs, suggesting that they had more sophisticated control of their flight, which no doubt gave them some advantages. 2\u2013300 specimens of 17 different species of pterosaur has been found at Solnhofen from eight different genera.p263 They include the earliest examples of \"Pterodactylus\", and \"Germanodactylus\", a genus which is also found in England and China. \"Ctenochasma\", also from Solnhofen, had a comb of 260 thin teeth showing it to be a filter-feeder that may have waded or swam in the water. There were several other genera with similar life-styles.\nIn the Lower Cretaceous there were many pterodactyloids, mostly quite small. Gradually, larger versions evolved, and by the Upper Cretaceous most pterosaurs had huge wing-spans and clearly covered huge distances soaring on upcurrents in a warm environment. \"Pteranodon\", with a wing-span of over 20 feet (7m), and \"Quetzalcoatlus\", with a wingspan of 40 feet (12m) are famous examples. The many dozens of partial skeletons of \"Pteranodon\" were found in areas where, in the Cretaceous of North America, there was a gigantic inland sea, the Western Interior Seaway. That makes it more or less certain that \"Pteranodon\" was mainly a fish-eating pterosaur. And, other sites in England and Argentina were also, at the time, shallow, warm inland seas. The general conclusion is that most pterosaurs were fish-eaters. However, it's worth remembering that animals from forest areas fossilize poorly. We can't say much about areas which are not fossiliferous.\nSince birds were already common in the Lower Cretaceous, they would have competed vigorously with the smaller pterodactyloids. That may explain the extinction of the smaller pterosaur species, though the lack of fossils from the forested areas makes it difficult to judge. The huge Upper Cretaceous types clearly lived a different life-style from the smaller species, and one which was not yet accessible to birds. As the climate changed in the Upper Cretaceous, becoming colder and more seasonal, the number of pterosaurs became fewer. Recent publications have shown that more pterosaurs survived to the end-Cretaceous event than was previously thought.\nLike most of the larger species on Earth, the huge pterosaurs did not survive the K/T extinction event. At least some families of birds did. So ended the competition between the two types of flying reptile through the long 79 million years of the Cretaceous period.p346\nPterosaur lifestyle.\nFood.\nThere are many adaptations of the head and jaws of pterosaurs, so it is quite certain that different forms used different feeding methods, as birds do. Overall, most fossils have been found in marine strata, which suggests that they could fly well over water, and that fish were on the menu for many species. The jaws of fish-eaters was long and often held forward-pointing teeth, good for catching fish (see \"Anhanguera\"). Remains of a last fish supper have been found in \"Pteranodon\".\nFossils show that one pterosaur, the \"Pterodaustro\" found in Argentina, had comb-like strainers in its mouth. The pterosaur probably ate by filling its lower jaw with water and pushing the water out of its mouth through the strainers. The strainers could catch any plankton or other small creatures that were in the water, and when the water was gone, the animal could eat what was left. Other species had long, compressed lower jaws, which suggest they were skimmers at the top of the water.\nThe other main item of diet was the insects. Flying insects were abundant in the Mesozoic, and many pterosaur species give clear signs that this was their food. These have a broad mouth, often with short peg-like teeth.p339\u2013341\nPterosaur flight.\nFor a long time people thought pterosaurs could only glide and soar, and were not strong enough to flap their wings. In the 20th century, after aeroplanes had been invented, our understanding of flight advanced. English palaeontologists showed that pterosaurs could fly, and Tilly Edinger showed that by the end of the Jurassic, pterosaur brains were more like that of modern birds than of \"Archaeopteryx\". Recent work has used working model to simulate their flight.p218 The wing membrane was about 1mm thick, with a tough skin and had long fibres reinforcing it. This can be clearly seen in some of the fossils.p332 The structure helped the wings survive the stresses of flight. The larger pterosaurs were mainly soarers, as is the case with birds today.\nHow pterosaurs moved on the ground has been something of a mystery. It is most likely that they walked on four legs while on the ground, as fossil tracks have been found showing they used both their legs and hands to support them.p210\u2013222 \nPterosaurs also had special bones. They were extremely light (even more than bird's wings \u2013 some were almost as thin as a piece of paper), and some were almost hollow. Tiny holes in the bones are evidence of air sacs which extended into the vertebrae and limb bones, as it does with birds. Also present were supporting struts which made these bones stronger. With these special bones, even the largest of pterosaurs, \"Quetzalcoatlus\", probably weighed less than 200 pounds.\nReproduction and development.\nPterosaurs were probably egg-layers, and some eggs have been found at pterosaur sites. There is evidence that some species, such as \"Pteranodon\", had sexual dimorphism (sexes looked different). The skeletons with large cranial (head) crests and small pelvic canals were presumably males. Where several specimens occur at the same location, adults can be distinguished from juveniles. Evidence of tooth wear in \"Eudimorphodon\" suggests the young were insectivorous, while the adults ate fish.p343 Development took place rapidly in these warm-blooded reptiles, and much of their life-style parallels that of birds. The high energy-level needed for flight explains why both reptilian forms (pterosaurs and birds) developed similar metabolism. In many respects, birds and pterosaurs are good examples of convergent evolution."}
{"id": "43720", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43720", "title": "Quetzalcoatlus", "text": "Quetzalcoatlus was a huge pterosaur, the largest animal ever to fly. It had a 10 to 12 meters wing-span (33/40 feet), but was light in construction (~200 pounds). \n\"Quetzalcoatlus\" had an unusually long neck, and when it stood on the ground it was as tall as a giraffe. \nIts fossil record is from the Upper Cretaceous of North America, 70\u201365.5 million years ago. \"Quetzalcoatlus\" became extinct at the K/T extinction event. \nIts discovery.\nA college student found the first \"Quetzalcoatlus\" fossil in Big Bend National Park in Texas. His name was Douglas Lawson, from the University of Texas in Austin. When he was in the park, he saw a bone sticking out of a rock. Since the bone looked hollow, like the bone of a bird, he thought it was part of a flying creature \u2013 and he was right. With his professor's help, he kept digging until lots of bones from an arm and wing were found. The rest of the animal's body was missing. Many others have looked for the rest of that huge pterosaur, but it has never been found. Other fossils of \"Quetzalcoatlus\" have been found, but none are as big as the one Lawson found.\nFlight.\nSince \"Quetzalcoatlus\" was so large, two researchers suggested it was too heavy to fly. This would have been astonishing, because in the whole fossil record there is no flightless pterosaur. It has been thought their mobility on the ground was too poor for them to survive without flight. However, a recent discussion of this idea concluded they probably could fly after all. Another analysis suggested their flight was quite strong. Since we have only a few bones, the question of weight cannot be settled at present.\nLifestyle.\nThe feeding habits of \"Quetzalcoatlus\" (which had a long beak with no teeth) are unknown. This question, and its flight, are still being discussed. The lack of a more detailed skeleton is the main problem in reaching conclusions. Two theories have been proposed.\nOne idea is that it ate fish, by flying with its jaw in the water, and snapping up fish when it hit them. Texas was largely covered by the Western Interior Seaway at the time. \"Of these proposed lifestyles, in-flight piscivory [fish-eating] appears to have gained the most acceptance, with skim-feeding being a frequently suggested foraging method.\nThe other theory is that it fed on land, partly as a carrion feeder, like vultures and buzzards, and foraged for small animals. This view is gaining ground, because the jaw does not show the adaptations for skimming found in modern birds who catch fish this way.\nIn flight, it was certainly a soarer, flying on up-currents of air in a warm environment, and its remains come from a site which was far inland in the Cretaceous.\nMedia.\n\"Quetzalcoatlus\" was shown in the movie \"When Dinosaurs Roamed America\" eating a dead \"Triceratops\" carcass."}
{"id": "43721", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43721", "title": "Mozilla (web browser)", "text": "Mozilla was a web browser that was made open source. It was developed by Mozilla Foundation. It was the base of Mozilla Firefox."}
{"id": "43722", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43722", "title": "Fedora (operating system)", "text": "Fedora is a distribution (or \"distro\") of Linux developed by the community-supported Fedora Project and sponsored by Red Hat. It is designed to be safe and is used by companies and governments. Fedora's mission statement is: \"Fedora is about the rapid progress of Free and Open Source software.\"\nLinus Torvalds, author of the Linux kernel, says he uses Fedora because it had fairly good support for PowerPC when he used that processor architecture. He became used to the operating system and continues to use it.\nReleases.\nFedora Core 1 - 4.\n\"Fedora Core 1\" was the first version of Fedora and was released on November 6, 2003, and was codenamed Yarrow. Fedora Core 1 was based on Red Hat Linux 9 and shipped with version 2.4.19 of the Linux kernel, version 2.4 of the GNOME desktop environment, and version 3.1.4 of KDE (the K Desktop Environment).\n\"Fedora Core 2\" was released on May 18, 2004, codenamed Tettnang. It shipped with Linux 2.6, GNOME 2.6, KDE 3.2.2, and SELinux XFree86 was replaced by the newer X.org, a merger of the previous official X11R6 release, which additionally included a number of updates to Xrender, Xft, Xcursor, fontconfig libraries, and other significant improvements.\n\"Fedora Core 3\" was released on November 8, 2004, codenamed Heidelberg. This was the first release of Fedora Core to include the Mozilla Firefox web browser, as well as support for the Indic languages. This release also replaced the LILO boot loader with GRUB. SELinux was also enabled by default, but with a new targeted policy, which was less strict than the policy used in Fedora Core 2. Fedora Core 3 shipped with GNOME 2.8 and KDE 3.3. It was the first release to include the new Fedora Extras repository.\n\"Fedora Core 4\" was released on June 13, 2005, with the codename Stentz. It shipped with Linux 2.6.11, KDE 3.4 and GNOME 2.10. This version introduced the new Clearlooks theme, which was inspired by the Red Hat Bluecurve theme. It also shipped with the OpenOffice.org 2.0 office suite, as well as Xen, a high performance and secure open source virtualization framework. It also introduced support for the PowerPC CPU architecture, and over 80 new policies for SELinux.\nFedora Core 5 - 6.\nThe last two cores introduced specific artwork for that version. This is a trend that has continued in later Fedora versions.\n\"Fedora Core 5\" was released on March 20, 2006, with the codename Bordeaux, and introduced the Fedora Bubbles artwork. It was the first Fedora release to include Mono and tools built with it such as Beagle, F-Spot and Tomboy. It also introduced new package management tools such as pup and pirut (\"see Yellow dog Updater, Modified\"). This release replaced the old LinuxThreads, with the Native POSIX Thread Library.\n\"Fedora Core 6\" was released on October 24, 2006, codenamed Zod. This release introduced the Fedora DNA artwork, replacing the Fedora Bubbles artwork used in Fedora Core 5. The codename is derived from the infamous villain, General Zod, from the Superman DC Comic Books. This version introduced support for the Compiz compositing window manager and AIGLX (a technology that enables GL-accelerated effects on a standard desktop). It shipped with Firefox 1.5 as the default web browser, and Smolt, a tool that allows users to inform developers about the hardware they use.\nNone of these distributions are maintained by the Fedora Project.\nFedora 10.\nFedora 10, codenamed \"Cambridge\", was released on November 25, 2008.\nPackage.\nFedora's official software package repository includes, for example, UNetbootin."}
{"id": "43729", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43729", "title": "Bagel", "text": "Bagels are a type of bread made with flour. They look like doughnuts, and they are leavened with yeast. They have a crisp, shiny crust and a dense inside. Bagels are glazed, and in a ring-shaped roll. They are different from doughnuts because they are boiled before baked. Bagels are sometimes called \"the cement doughnuts\". \nThe bagel is regarded as a special kind of Jewish food. They are eaten usually for breakfast or a snack.\nBagels are made from the basic bread ingredients of flour, yeast, salt, and sweet kinds of spices. Flour gives the bread its chewy taste, which can be made more light by eggs, milk, and butter. They are the only bread product that is boiled before it is baked.\nServing.\nBagels are often toasted in a toaster and then paired with foods like cream cheese (a soft cheese that tastes a little sweet) and jam, or with butter. Bagels can also be used to make sandwiches, with meat (for example smoked salmon) and egg and cheese. Bagel sandwiches are usually eaten for breakfast or lunch.\nHistory.\nBagels were formally an obscure ethnic treat found only in the city's Jewish neighourhoods. Bagels were first sold in grocery stores in the 1950s. Frozen bagels were first introduced in 1960.\nWhen Polish Jews went away to America, they brought the beugel with them. The first beugel bakeries were founded in New York City in the 1920s. Later the name was changed and called a bagel. Bagels have been used as a symbol of the continuous cycle of life\u2014without beginning and without end.\nIn the East End of London, the bagel is known as a beigel, and poplar in many of the areas where many Jewish immigrants first arrived in London in the 19th century, such as Whitechapel and Spitalfields, and Brick Lane in particular, home to the Beigel Bake."}
{"id": "43730", "revid": "372498", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43730", "title": "Doughnut", "text": "A doughnut (spelled donut in various marketing sectors) is a type of deep fried dessert food made out of dough or batter.\nHow they are made.\nRound ringed doughnuts are made by joining the ends of a long, thin piece of dough into a ring or by using a doughnut cutter, which perfectly cuts the outside and inside shape, leaving a doughnut-shaped piece of dough and a doughnut hole from dough removed from the center. This smaller piece of dough can be cooked or re-added to the batch to make more doughnuts. A disk-shaped doughnut can also be stretched and molded into a torus until the center breaks to form a hole. Or, a doughnut depositor can be used to place a circle of liquid dough (batter) into the deep fryer. Doughnuts can be made from a yeast-based dough for more puffy doughnuts or a special type of cake batter. Yeast-raised doughnuts contain about 25% oil by weight, whereas cake doughnuts' oil content is around 20%, but they have extra fat in the batter before frying. Cake doughnuts are fried for about 90 seconds at about 190 \u00b0C to 198 \u00b0C, turning once. Yeast-raised doughnuts absorb more oil because they take longer to fry, about 150 seconds, at 182 \u00b0C to 190 \u00b0C. Cake doughnuts normally weigh between 24 g and 28 g, whereas yeast-raised doughnuts normally are 38 g and are mostly larger when finished. Some types of cake doughnuts are also baked, as opposed to fried, which greatly reduces the fat content.\nTypes.\nThe two most common types of doughnut are ring doughnuts, which are shaped like rings, and filled doughnuts, which are round and have jam, jelly, custard, whipped cream, or chocolate inside them. There are also \"doughnut holes\" or \"munchkins\" which come in the shape of small balls. Most doughnuts have an icing (also called a \"frosting\") made with icing sugar, water, and flavourings (such as chocolate). Some doughnuts are rolled in sweet foods such as sugar or shredded coconut.\nServing.\nDoughnuts are often eaten in the morning, along with a cup of hot coffee. Doughnuts are sold at doughnut shops, bakeries, or grocery stores. People also eat doughnuts as a dessert, or as a snack."}
{"id": "43738", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43738", "title": "Mary II of England", "text": "Mary II (30 April 1662 \u2013 28 December 1694) was Queen regnant of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1689 until her death. Mary was a Protestant. She became queen after the Glorious Revolution, which resulted in the deposition of her Roman Catholic father, James II and VII. Mary ruled together with her husband, William III and II. He became the ruler of both countries when she died in 1694. Popular histories usually call their joint reigns as those of \"William and Mary\". Mary had less power than William when William remained in England. When William went to military campaigns, however, she governed alone. She was a powerful, firm, and effective ruler. She gave most of her authority to her husband, but he greatly depended on her. She was very active in the Church of England, ruling it as its Supreme Governor.\nMary was born at St. James Palace in London on 30 April 1662. Her father was James, Duke of York, and her mother was his first wife, Lady Anne Hyde. She was their oldest daughter. Mary's uncle was Charles II. Her grandfather by her mother's side was Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon. He served for a long time as Charles's chief advisor. Her mother gave birth to eight children, but only Mary and her younger sister Anne lived to adulthood.\nThe Duke of York became a Roman Catholic in 1668 or 1669, but Mary and Anne had a Protestant education, as Charles II had commanded. Mary's mother died in 1671, and her father married again in 1673. He took Mary of Modena, a Catholic, as his second wife. She was also known as Mary Beatrice d'Este. Before her marriage, Mary wrote many letters to Frances Apsley, the daughter of James II's hawks keeper. However, she did not return Mary's interest.\nWhen she was 15, Lady Mary became betrothed to her first cousin, the Protestant William, Prince of Orange. William was the son of Mary, Princess Royal and Prince William II of Nassau. At first, Charles II did not want Mary to marry William. He wanted Mary to marry the heir to the French Throne, the Dauphin Louis, instead. This was because he hoped that England would become friends with France. He also wanted to have a Catholic successor to the throne. But because of Parliament's pressure, he later approved their marriage. He thought that it would make the Protestants like him more, but he was wrong. Mary and William married in London on 4 November 1677. It was reported that Mary wept through the whole ceremony.\nMary went to the Netherlands and lived there as William's wife. The Dutch people liked her because of her lively, friendly nature, and Mary loved William deeply. However, the marriage was often unhappy. Her three pregnancies ended in miscarriage or stillbirth, and Mary was very sad that she did not have a child. Her husband was often cold to her, and he had an affair with Elizabeth Villiers, one of Mary's ladies-in-waiting, for a long time. After some time, though, he grew warmer towards Mary.\nThe Glorious Revolution.\nWhen Charles II died without any children in 1685, the Duke of York became King as James II in England and Ireland. He also became James VII in Scotland. He tried to give freedom of religion to non-Anglicans. He did this by making the acts of Parliament invalid by Royal Decree. The public did not like this. Several Protestant politicians and noblemen entered into negotiations (trying to reach agreements through discussion) with Mary's husband as early as 1687. In May 1688, James forced Anglican clergymen to read the Declaration of Indulgence. The Declaration of Indulgence was a statement that gave religious freedom to those who did not agree with the Church of England. This made him much less popular. Protestants became even more fearful when his wife, Mary of Modena, gave birth to a son\u2013James Francis Edward\u2013in June 1688. They were fearful because the son would, unlike Mary and Anne, be raised a Roman Catholic. Some said that the boy had been secretly carried into the Queen's room in a bed-warming pan instead of her stillborn baby. There was no strong proof to support this story, but Mary publicly doubted the boy's legitimacy. She sent a list of suspicious questions to her sister, Anne, about the boy's birth.\nOn 30 June, the Immortal Seven secretly asked William, who was in the Netherlands with Mary, to come to England with an army. William, who was jealous of Mary's position and power, did not want to go at first. But Mary told William that she did not care about political power. She said \"she would be no more but his wife, and that she would do all that lay in her power to make him King for life\".\nWilliam agreed to attack. He declared that James' newborn son was the \"pretended Prince of Wales\". He also gave a list of what the English people wanted, and said that he only wanted to have \"a free and lawful Parliament assembled\". The Dutch army, which had been turned back by a storm in October, landed on 5 November. The English Army and Navy went over to William. At this time, the English people's confidence in James was very low. They did not even try to save their King. On 11 December, the King tried to run away, but failed. He tried to run away again on 23 December. This second attempt was successful, and James escaped to France. He lived there in exile until his death.\nThough Mary was sad because of the deposition of her father, William ordered her to look happy when they arrived in London. Because of this, people thought she was being cold to her father. James also thought his daughter was unfaithful to him. This hurt Mary deeply.\nIn 1689, a Convention Parliament called by the Prince of Orange came together to discuss what they should do. William of Orange felt uncomfortable about his position. He wanted to rule as a King, not simply as a husband of a Queen. The only example of joint monarchy was from the sixteenth century. This was Queen Mary I and the Spanish Prince Philip. When they married, it was agreed that Prince Philip would take the title of King. But Philip II was King only during his wife's lifetime. He also did not have much power. William wanted to remain King even after his wife's death. Some important people suggested making Mary the only ruler. But Mary, who was faithful to her husband, refused.\nOn 13 February 1689, Parliament passed the Declaration of Right. In this declaration, it said that James, by trying to run away on 11 December 1688, had abandoned the government, so no one at the time was king. Normally, James's oldest son, James Francis Edward would have been the heir. However, Parliament offered the crown to William and Mary as joint Sovereigns instead. But it was added that \"the sole and full exercise of the regal (royal) power be only in and executed by the said Prince of Orange in the names of the said Prince and Princess during their joint lives.\" The declaration was later extended to take out all Catholics. This was because \"it hath been found (discovered) by experience that it is inconsistent (not in harmony) with the safety and welfare of this Protestant kingdom to be governed by a papist prince\".\nWilliam and Mary were crowned together at Westminster Abbey on 11 April 1689. The Archbishop of Canterbury usually performed coronations. But William Sancroft, the Archbishop at that time, felt that James II's removal had been wrong. Therefore, the Bishop of London, Henry Compton, crowned them instead. On the day of the Coronation, the Convention of the Estates of Scotland declared at last that James was no longer King of Scotland. William and Mary were offered the separate Scottish Crown. This was because the two kingdoms were not united until the Acts of Union in 1707. They accepted on 11 May.\nEven after this was declared, there was still strong support for James in Scotland. John Graham of Clevehouse, the Viscount of Dundee, raised an army and won a victory at Killiecrankie on 27 July. But Dundee's army suffered great losses, and he was seriously wounded at the start of the battle. This stopped the only effective resistance to William, and the revolt was quickly crushed. The next month, there was a great defeat at the Battle of Dunkeld.\nRule.\nIn December 1689 Parliament passed one of the most important documents in English history. This was the Bill of Rights. This measure gave several rights to Parliament and the people. Among other things, it declared that the Sovereign could not break laws passed by Parliament, demand taxes if the Parliament did not agree, raise an army during a time of peace if the Parliament did not agree, or punish members of the House of Parliament for anything they said during discussions.\nAfter either William III or Mary II died, the other was to continue to rule. The person who would become the monarch after them would be any of their children. After the children would be Mary's sister Anne and her children. Last of all would be any children William III might have had from any marriage after that.\nFrom 1690, William was often away from England, at first fighting Jacobites in Ireland. While her husband was away, Mary took care of the government. She was a firm ruler, and ordered her own uncle, Henry Hyde, 2nd Earl of Clarendon, to go to prison for trying to put James II back onto the throne. In 1692, she fired and put John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, in prison for similar reasons. This made her much less popular. It also damaged her relationship with her sister, Anne. Anne had been strongly influenced by Churchill's wife, Sarah. She appeared at court with Sarah and supported Churchill, which made Mary very angry. She demanded that Anne make Sarah go away. Mary did not visit Anne during her pregnancy after that. After the baby was born, Mary did visit Anne, but she spent her time berating Anne for her friendship with Sarah. The sisters never saw each other again.\nWilliam had crushed the Irish Jacobites by 1692, but he continued with campaigns away from England to begin a war against France in the Netherlands. When William was away, Mary acted in her own name but on his advice. When he was in England, Mary never joined in political matters, as had been agreed in the Bill of Rights. However, she did join in the affairs of the Church, and all church matters passed through her hands.\nMary died of smallpox at Kensington Palace on 28 December 1694. She was buried at Westminster Abbey. When she died, Henry Purcell was called to write her funeral music, titled \"Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary\". William had grown to depend on Mary more and more, and was very sad when she died. It is reported that he said that \"from being the happiest\" he was \"now going to be the miserablest creature on earth\".\nLegacy.\nAfter Mary II's death, William III continued to rule as King. Princess Anne's last living child, William, Duke of Gloucester, died in July 1700. Parliament saw that William would have no more children. Because of this, it passed the Act of Settlement 1701. After Anne, the Crown would go to their nearest Protestant relative, Sophia, Electress of Hanover, and her Protestant heirs. When William III died in 1702, he was succeeded by Anne. She was succeeded by the son of Electress Sophia, George I.\nMary gave money to the College of William and Mary (in the present day Williamsburg, Virginia) in 1693. She also began the Royal Hospital for Seamen, Greenwich.\nTitle, styles, honours and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nWilliam III and Mary II called themselves \"William and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.\" when they began their rule. On 11 April 1689, the Estates of Scotland recognized them as Sovereigns. From then on, William and Mary called themselves \"William and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.\".\nArms.\nThe arms used by the King and Queen were: \"Quarterly, I and IV Grandquarterly, Azure three fleurs-de-lis Or (for France) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England); II Or a lion rampant within a tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland); overall an escutcheon Azure billetty and a lion rampant Or (for the House of Orange-Nassau)\"."}
{"id": "43739", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43739", "title": "Mary II of Scotland", "text": ""}
{"id": "43740", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43740", "title": "Goal", "text": "Goal can mean more than one thing. These meanings are listed below:"}
{"id": "43744", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43744", "title": "1936 Summer Olympics", "text": "The 1936 Summer Olympics, officially known as the Games of the XI Olympiad, were held in Berlin, Germany. \nThe games were thought to be successful. The costs of the games was mostly paid for by the German government.\nParticipating nations.\nA total of 49 nations sent athletes to compete at the Berlin games."}
{"id": "43746", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43746", "title": "Mesopotamia", "text": "Mesopotamia\u00a0(Ancient Greek: \u039c\u03b5\u03c3\u03bf\u03c0\u03bf\u03c4\u03b1\u03bc\u03af\u03b1\u00a0- \"land between rivers\") is a historical region in the Middle East. It included most of today\u2019s Iraq, and parts of modern-day Iran,\u00a0Syria\u00a0and\u00a0Turkey. The 'two rivers' of the name referred to the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers. \nThe land was called 'Al-Jazirah' (\"the island\") by the Arabs, and Egyptologist J.H. Breasted later included it in the\u00a0\"Fertile Crescent\". The region is bounded in the northeast by the Zagros Mountains and in the southeast by the Arabian Plateau.\nThe area is often called the \"cradle of civilization\". The ancient writing called cuneiform was first used around 3000 BC by the Sumerians. Historically important cities in Mesopotamia included Uruk, Ur, Nippur, Nineveh, and Babylon. \nMajor territorial states were the Akkadian kingdom, the Third Dynasty of Ur, and the Assyrian Empire. Some of the important historical Mesopotamian leaders were Ur-Nammu (king of Ur), Sargon of Akkad (the founder of the Akkadian kingdom), Hammurabi (who established the Old Babylonian state), and Tiglath-Pileser I (who started the Assyrian Empire).\nMany advances in technology were made by the ancient Sumerians, such as irrigation, trade by river, and flood control. Sumerians had agriculture and domesticated animals, or livestock, from the earliest records. Babylon is likely the first city built by settled people. Mesopotamia was also the place where the wheel was first used. First it was a potter's wheel that was used to make clay pots, then Sumerians adapted it for transport.\nGeography.\nMesopotamia is made up of different regions. Northern Mesopotamia is made up of hills and plains. The land is quite fertile due to seasonal rains, and the rivers and streams that come from the mountains. Early settlers farmed the land and used timber, metals, and stone. Southern Mesopotamia is made up of marshy areas and wide, flat, plains. Cities developed along the Euphrates and Tigris rivers which flow through the region. Early settlers had to irrigate the land along the banks of the rivers in order for their crops to grow.\nPeople of Mesopotamia.\nMesopotamia has been conquered many times by many different people. It was the heartland of the Sumerian, Akkadian, Babylonian and Assyrian empires. As each new group moved into the region they adopted some of the culture, traditions, and beliefs of the people who had come before. It was conquered by Alexander the Great (332 BC), the Parthians (150 BC), the Romans, the Persian Empire, and the Arabs (7th century). It is still one of the most fertile (and therefore valuable) parts of the Middle East.\nAncient Mesopotamia begins in the late 6th millennium BC, and ends with either the rise of the Achaemenid Persians in the 6th century BC or the Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia in the 7th century CE. This long period may be divided as follows:\nEpic of Gilgamesh.\nThe Epic of Gilgamesh is an ancient story about a relationship between Gilgamesh and his close companion, Enkidu. Enkidu is a wild man created by the gods as Gilgamesh's equal to distract him from oppressing the citizens of Uruk. Together they undertake dangerous quests that incur the displeasure of the gods. Firstly, they journey to the Cedar Mountain to defeat Humbaba, its monstrous guardian. Later they kill the Bull of Heaven that the goddess Ishtar has sent to punish Gilgamesh for turning down her advances.\nThe second part of the epic is about Gilgamesh's distressed reaction to Enkidu's death, which takes the form of a quest for immortality. Gilgamesh attempts to learn the secret of eternal life by undertaking a long and perilous journey to meet the immortal flood hero, Utnapishtim. The words addressed to Gilgamesh in the midst of his quest foreshadow the end result: "}
{"id": "43747", "revid": "766335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43747", "title": "Joss Whedon", "text": "Joss Hill Whedon (born June 23, 1964) is an American writer, director and producer. He was born Joseph Hill Whedon in New York City. He created the well-known television series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", \"Angel\", and \"Firefly\", and has also written several movie scripts and several comic book series. He went to high school at a school in New York and Winchester College in England. After leaving high school, he received a film degree from Wesleyan University in 1987. Whedon is the director of the films \"The Avengers\" (2012) and \"\" (2015).\nWhedon and Zack Snyder directed \"Justice League\" (2017).\nTelevision work.\nAfter moving to Los Angeles, Whedon got his first writing job on the television series \"Roseanne\". After working on movie scripts for several years, he went back to television, where he created three television series. Joss has had Cameo appearances (brief 'fun' appearances) in his series \"Buffy\", \"Angel\", and \"Firefly\". He has also been in an episode of \"Veronica Mars\".\nWhedon has been said to be the world's first third-generation television writer. His father is Tom Whedon, a writer for \"The Electric Company\" in the 1970s and \"The Golden Girls\" in the 1980s. His grandfather is John Whedon, a writer for \"The Donna Reed Show\" in the 1950s. His brother, Zack Whedon, is a writer on HBO's \"Deadwood\".\n\"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\".\nThe movie \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", filmed by director Fran Rubel Kuzui after a script of Whedon's, was not well-liked by critics and audiences. Years after, Whedon picked up its idea again and turned it into a hugely successful television series, also called \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\".\nThe episode \"Hush\" (written by Whedon) got an Emmy Award nomination for Best Writing in a Drama Series in 2000. Another episode that got an Emmy Award nomination was \"Once More, With Feeling\", written and directed by Whedon. This was a musical episode, in which the actors were singing and dancing.\nThe series aired on The WB Network for five seasons, then moved to UPN for its last two seasons. It was the first series in television history to change networks between seasons without being cancelled and then picked up by a different network. Though \"Buffy\" first aired on Mondays at 9pm, from the middle of the second season it ran on Tuesdays at 8pm. In the musical episode, Buffy makes the comment, \"Dawn's in trouble. Must be Tuesday.\"\n\"Angel\".\n\"Angel\" was a spin-off of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\". The series was named after Buffy's vampire-with-a-soul boyfriend. It was created by Whedon and David Greenwalt. Tim Minear also helped at times. First shown in September 1999 on the WB, the series was on after \"Buffy\" on Tuesday evenings. When \"Buffy\" switched networks in 2001, \"Angel\" aired in a number of different time slots. The series' last episode had more people watching than the final \"Buffy\" episode. Joss Whedon was briefly in the series as the character 'Numfar' in its second season. The WB cancelled the series in May 2004 while it was in its fifth season. As Whedon had not planned to end \"Angel,\" he had to change the story and ending of both the final season and the series.\n\"Firefly\".\nThe series \"Firefly\" did not go smoothly. Fox cancelled it in 2002, after airing only 11 of the 14 episodes and airing them out of order. The original two-hour pilot was the last episode aired. The contract with Fox did not allow the series to be shown by another network. Because of how Fox handled \"Firefly\", Whedon has said that he will not work with Fox again, under any circumstances.\nWhedon had been writing a movie script about the \"Firefly\" series for Universal Studios. When the television series came out on DVD, the sales of the DVD were good enough to make sure the movie could be produced. In early 2004 Whedon said that a \"Firefly\" movie had been accepted by Universal, and shooting started in July 2004. The movie, called \"Serenity\", was in movie theaters in the United States on September 30, 2005. It was well liked by critics and fans, but did not make much money in theaters.\n\"Dollhouse\".\nAlthough Whedon has said that he would not work with Fox again, it was announced on November 1, 2007 that this was changed. Whedon was hired to create seven episodes of a new series named \"Dollhouse\" starring Eliza Dushku. Dushku and Whedon have worked together before on \"Buffy\". The series is about people who have memories, skills and even complete personalities put into their minds for special jobs. After the job, their minds are erased until the next job. \"Dollhouse\" tells the story of Dushku's character, Echo, as she starts to remember things about herself even though her mind is constantly being erased. The series is about her trying to learn who she really is.\n\"Dollhouse\" first aired on February 13, 2009.\nMovies.\nWhedon has written and helped write several movies including \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", \"Toy Story\", ' and \"Titan A.E.\". He was nominated for an Academy Award for \"Toy Storys screenplay.\nHe also wrote helped edit and rewrite the scripts of \"Speed\", \"Waterworld\", \"Twister\" and \"X-Men\". Except for \"Speed\", not much of Whedon's work stayed in the final versions of any of these screenplays. He has said that he had a good script for \"Alien: Resurrection\", which was ruined by its director Jean-Pierre Jeunet. His \"Waterworld\" script was thrown out. Only two of his lines were kept in the final script of \"X-Men\". Even the \"Buffy\" movie was very different from what he originally wrote. According to Graham Yost, the writer of \"Speed\", Whedon wrote most of its dialogue.\nHe wrote and directed 2005's \"Serenity\", based on his television series \"Firefly\". \"Serenity\" won the 2006 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form.\nIn 2006, Whedon was scheduled to write and direct Warner Bros.' version of \"Wonder Woman\". He eventually stopped working on the script. Universal Pictures agreed to a script by Whedon called \"Goners\" which he will also direct.\nParts of the storyline in the movie \"\" are very similar to what he wrote in the Marvel comic book \"Astonishing X-Men\". The idea of a cure for mutation was his story. The scientist who finds the cure in the movie is named Dr. Kavita Rao. This is the same name as the scientist in the comic book. Simon Kinberg has said someone at the studio who had read Whedon's comics asked the writers to use a mutant cure idea in their script.\nIn an interview with Empire Online, Whedon said he would like to direct a Harry Potter movie. However, he has not seen any of the movies and will not watch any until J.K. Rowling is done writing the series\nIn 2012, two movies produced by Whedon were released. The horror movie \"Cabin in the Woods\" was released in April. Whedon wrote the script for the movie with director Drew Goddard. On May 4th, the Marvel Comics superhero movie \"The Avengers\" was released in the United States. Whedon wrote and directed the movie. \"The Avengers\" was released internationally one week before it was released in the United States. This release did not include some of the largest international markets, including China, Russia and Japan. It still made $185M in it international opening week. It was the 9th highest foreign opening ever.\nComic books.\nWhedon has loved comic books all his life. He wrote the Dark Horse Comics series \"Fray\". The story takes place in the far future of the Buffyverse.\nHe was also involved with the \"Buffy\" comic book series. He wrote the main storyline of the five-issue mini-series \"Tales of the Vampires\" and three stories in the \"Tales of the Slayers\". One of those stories was about Melaka Fray from \"Fray\".\nThe three-issue mini-series \"\" was based on the \"Firefly\" series. It took place just before the movie \"Serenity\". It was released from June to August of 2005. The first two issues sold out before going into a second printing.\nWhedon has said that more \"Serenity\" comics are planned for the near future. \nWhedon and other \"Buffy\" writers write more for the \"Buffy\" series. These stories would take place after the final episode. They would be considered \"Season 8\". The first 6-issues are due out in March 2007. Both projects will be published by Dark Horse Comics. In August 2007, Dark Horse Comics began a series on online comics on MySpace. One of the series shown, \"Sugarshock\", is written by Whedon\nWhedon is also writing \"Astonishing X-Men\" in Marvel Comics' popular series about the X-Men. This has been one of Marvel's best-selling comics in 2006. It has been nominated for many awards. It won the award for \"Best Continuing Series\" in 2006.\nIt has also been said that Whedon helped writers with the ending to the comic \"Civil War\".\nWhedon will become the new writer of the Marvel comic \"Runaways\" when series creator Brian K. Vaughan finishes his run. Whedon is actually a fan of the series. He had a letter published in the first volume. The letter was included in the Volume 1 hardcover version.\nCommon themes and motifs in Whedon's writing.\nFeminism.\nWhedon sees himself as a feminist. Feminist themes are common in his work. The best example is what he says is his habit of writing about \"teenage girls with superpowers\". This is seen in \"Buffy\", \"Firefly\", and \"Serenity\". Whedon says his mother is the reason for his feminist idea. When Roseanne Barr asked him how he could write so well for women, he replied, \"If you met my mom, you wouldn't ask.\" \nThe character Kitty Pryde from the X-Men comic was an early model for Whedon's strong teenage girl characters: \"If there's a bigger influence on Buffy than Kitty, I don\u2019t know what it was. She was an adolescent girl finding out she has great power and dealing with it.\" Many of Whedon's young female characters went through the same type of thing. Whedon has now come full circle, writing the character of Kitty Pryde in the \"Astonishing X-Men\" comic.\nHomosexuality.\nWhedon is interested in the homosexual community. He is strongly for LGBT rights. In his works, including \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", he has gay characters as both the major and the minor characters. In \"Buffy\", he used scenes that suggested that either Xander Harris or Willow Rosenberg might be homosexual. At the time, he did not know which character he wanted to be gay. He decided that Willow would take part in a lesbian relationship with another young woman, fellow college student Tara Maclay. Two more minor characters in the series, Larry and Scott, were also homosexuals. In \"Angel\", the script hinted at a homosexual experience between Spike and Angel. In \"Firefly\", Inara Serra was shown as being bisexual. She accepted both male and female clients.\nDialogue.\nThe dialogue in Joss Whedon's series and movies is notable. It is often very witty and has many pop culture references. Some are easy to notice other are more difficult. He also likes to turn nouns into adjectives by adding a \"y\" at the end of the word (\"Vampires are fangy\"). According to one of the \"Buffy\" writers, \"It's just the way that Joss actually talks.\" \nDeath.\nMany characters die in Whedon's series. This is very true in \"Buffy\". It is common for extras and even minor characters to die in action-based series and movies. Whedon also kills off main characters. He gets the audience to care about the character before their death. It is a part of \"doing [his] job\". On the 'Serenity' DVD commentary, Whedon says that he'd rather have fans say 'Why'd they kill (that guy)? I liked him!' than 'Oh. He's dead. Turn the page'. Whedon often kills off characters right after something very good happens to them.\nRelationships.\nAs seen in \"Buffy,\" \"Firefly,\" and \"Angel\", nearly all of the romantic relationships Whedon series end badly. One member in the relationship will usually end up dying or turning evil. The break-up will end up being very painful.\nFamily.\nThere is a strong theme that family is the group of people that a person lives their life with, not the people who raised them as a child. This is a major theme for the main characters in all of his television series.\nFatherhood.\nWhedon often shows fathers in a bad way. Most of them are not around. Wes' father was shown several times to be abusive. While mothers play a big part in his works, characters rarely talk about or seem to be ever affected by their fathers. Whedon's characters often find someone to take the place of a father in their lives."}
{"id": "43748", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43748", "title": "Halifax Regional Municipality, Nova Scotia", "text": ""}
{"id": "43756", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43756", "title": "Guanajuato City", "text": "Guanajuato is a Mexican city. It is one of Mexico's safest cities. Guanajuato is the capital of Guanajuato state."}
{"id": "43758", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43758", "title": "Bathurst, New South Wales", "text": "Bathurst is a city in the state of New South Wales, Australia. It is about 200km west of Sydney. Bathurst has a campus of Charles Sturt University and a cathedral."}
{"id": "43765", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43765", "title": "Doughnuts", "text": ""}
{"id": "43766", "revid": "861756", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43766", "title": "List of Pacific typhoon seasons", "text": "The following is a list of Pacific typhoon seasons. Unlike Atlantic and Pacific hurricane seasons, they run for the whole year, starting on January 1 and ending on December 31. These dates are when tropical cyclones usually form in the western half of the Pacific Ocean, north of the equator.\n1900s.\n1950\n1951\n1952\n1953\n1954\n1955\n1956\n1957\n1958\n1959\n1960\n1961\n1962\n1963\n1964\n1965\n1966\n1967\n1968\n1969\n1970\n1971\n1972\n1973\n1974\n1975\n1976\n1977\n1978\n1979\n1980\n1981\n1982\n1983\n1984\n1985\n1986\n1987\n1988\n1989\n1990\n1991\n1992\n1993\n1994\n1995\n1996\n1997\n1998\n1999\n2000s.\n2000\n2001\n2002\n2003\n2004\n2005\n2006\n2007\n2008\n2009\n2010\n2011\n2012\n2013\n2014\n2015\n2016\n2017\n2018\n2019\n2020"}
{"id": "43767", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43767", "title": "Drinking", "text": ""}
{"id": "43771", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43771", "title": "Songhai Empire", "text": "The Songhai Empire dominated the western Sahel in the 15th and 16th century. \nAt its peak the empire was one of the largest in both Islamic and African history. The Songhai people were the ruling elite in the empire. Gao was the capital of the empire. Other important cities in the empire were Timbuktu and Djenn\u00e9, conquered in 1468 and 1475 respectively. Trade flourished in those towns. \nInitially, the empire was ruled by the Sonni dynasty (c.\u20091464\u20131493), but it was later replaced by the Askiya dynasty (1493\u20131591)."}
{"id": "43773", "revid": "561485", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43773", "title": "SeaMonkey", "text": "SeaMonkey is a free and open source Internet application suite, which uses the Gecko rendering engine. It works on many operating systems. It is very useful, and includes an e-mail client, a calendar, a HTML editor, an IRC client, and a web browser. It is made by the SeaMonkey Council, formerly by Mozilla Foundation.\nHistory.\nOn March 10, 2005 the Mozilla Foundation said that they will not develop the Mozilla Application suite, including the Netscape web browser, because Firefox and Thunderbird were more popular. The SeaMonkey Council renamed the project SeaMonkey and continued its development. The newest version of its main release version is 2.46.\nFeatures.\nThe web browser of SeaMonkey contains a lot of features used in new web browsers like tabbed browsing, pop-up blocking, e-mail, newsgroups, web editing software, spell checking, and an address book.\nOptionally included in the SeaMonkey suite is an IRC chat application."}
{"id": "43774", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43774", "title": "Proceratosaurus", "text": "Proceratosaurus was a small dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic, about 165 million years ago. It was found in Gloucestershire, England, in 1910. It was a carnivorous theropod.\n\"Proceratosaurus\" was first believed to be an early ancestor of \"Ceratosaurus\", but it was actually an ancestor of the coelurosaurs. Thus, it was an early ancestor of \"Tyrannosaurus\" and its relatives in the Upper Cretaceous.\nThe animal in life was about 3m long and weighed up to 60kg."}
{"id": "43775", "revid": "22653", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43775", "title": "Cowboy Bebop", "text": "Cowboy Bebop is a Japanese anime television show aired from 1998 to 1999. It was created by Sunrise and directed by Shinichiro Watanabe. The show is about a group of bounty hunters who travel in outer space to catch criminals. It has 26 episodes. The series has received a \"TV-14\" rating in the United States, while six episodes received a TV-MA and three episodes receiving a TV-PG. The series aired in the United States in 2001 on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim. It was the first anime to be aired on Adult Swim. It was very successful. It was so successful that Cartoon Network decided to put more anime on Adult Swim. There is a movie, a manga, and two video games based on the show. The movie is called \"\". The video games are for Playstation and Playstation 2 were not released in the United States. The series is inspired by American culture. Jazz music is mostly played in the show. The episodes are called \"Sessions.\" \nStory.\nIn 2071, the members of the space ship Bebop travel through outer space trying to catch criminals. Bounty hunters are known as \"Cowboys\". If they catch the criminals alive then they get a reward. If the criminals die, the cowboys get nothing. The criminals are called bounties. Most episodes are about catching a bounty. Some episodes are about the characters' pasts and lives. At the beginning there are two main heroes, Spike and Jet. Later they would meet with others. They had become the crew of the space ship Bebop. Other members of the Bebop are Faye, computer hacker Ed, and a dog named Ein."}
{"id": "43778", "revid": "497303", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43778", "title": "The Vision of Escaflowne", "text": "The Vision of Escaflowne is a Japanese anime television show that aired in Japan on April 2, 1996. It is called Tenkuu no Escaflowne in Japanese which means \"Escaflowne of the Heavens\". It was made by Sunrise and directed by Kazuki Akane. Escaflowne has 26 episodes.\n\"Escaflowne\" has two mangas based on it, a videogame that was made for Playstation, and a movie.\nEpisode List.\nEpisode 1 Faiteful Confession\nEpisode 2 The Girl From the Mystic Moon\nEpisode 3 A Gallant Swordsman\nEpisode 4 The Diabolical Adonis\nEpisode 5 Seal of the Brothers\nEpisode 6 City of Intrigue\nEpisode 7 Unexpected Partings\nEpisode 8 The Day the Angel Flew\nEpisode 9 Memories of a Feather\nEpisode 10 The Blue Eyed Prince\nEpisode 11 Prophecy of Death\nEpisode 12 The Secret Door\nEpisode 13 Red Destiny\nEpisode 14 Dangerous Wounds\nEpisode 15 Paradise Lost\nEpisode 16 The Guided Ones\nEpisode 17 The Edge of the World\nEpisode 18 Gravity of Destiny\nEpisode 19 Operation: Golden Rule of Love\nEpisode 20 False Vows\nEpisode 21 Reaction of Fortune\nEpisode 22 The Black Winged Angel\nEpisode 23 Storm Premonition\nEpisode 24 Fateful Decision\nEpisode 25 The Zone of Absolute Fortune\nEpisode 26 Eternal Love"}
{"id": "43779", "revid": "6333484", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43779", "title": "Fusion", "text": "Fusion means to merge or combine. It could also mean:"}
{"id": "43780", "revid": "915943", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43780", "title": "Fir", "text": "Firs (\"Abies\") are about 45-55 species of evergreen trees in the family \"Pinaceae\". Fir trees can reach heights of 10\u201380 m tall and trunk diameters of 0.5\u20134 m when mature. The difference between firs and other members of the pine family is that their needle-like leaves are attached to the twig by a base that resembles a small suction cup, and by erect, cylindrical female cones 5\u201325\u00a0cm long that release the winged seeds. The male cones are normally much smaller and spread through the tree so that the wind can help pollinate the female cones.\nLike all members of the pine family, these trees have a sticky sap called resin.\nFir wood is not good to use in buildings because it is not very resistant to insects and decay. It is usually cut or squeezed into thin sheets or pieces and made into plywood or for indoor or temporary outdoor use. However, fir trees are used widely in gardening. They can be used as shelter trees to protect other plants from wind or grown alone as decorative trees."}
{"id": "43782", "revid": "344989", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43782", "title": "Harry Potter Prisoner of Azkaban", "text": ""}
{"id": "43783", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43783", "title": "Conifer cone", "text": "A confier cone (or pine cone) is an organ on plants in the division Pinophyta (conifers) that contains the reproductive structures. It is the part of a tree that lets the tree reproduce. Its formal name in botany is strobilus, plural \"strobili\".\nThe familiar woody cone is the female cone, which produces seeds. The male cones, which produce pollen, are usually smaller and much less conspicuous even at full maturity. The individual plates of a cone are known as scales.\nThe male cone (microstrobilus or pollen cone) is structurally similar across all conifers, differing only in small ways (mostly in scale arrangement) from species to species. Extending out from a central axis are microsporophylls (modified leaves). Under each microsporophyll is one or several microsporangia (pollen sacs).\nConifer cones and their seeds have been used for lots of different purposes. They are often used for decorations. Some seeds, for example, the seeds of pinyon pines, are used in prepared foods and baking. \nMost mature cones are closed when wet and open when dry. In a few species, it takes fire to open the cones."}
{"id": "43786", "revid": "3317", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43786", "title": "Jacko", "text": ""}
{"id": "43796", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43796", "title": "Spike Spiegel", "text": ""}
{"id": "43797", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43797", "title": "Jet Black", "text": ""}
{"id": "43798", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43798", "title": "Faye Valentine", "text": ""}
{"id": "43799", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43799", "title": "Edward Wong Hau Pepelu Tivrusky IV", "text": ""}
{"id": "43800", "revid": "4623178", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43800", "title": "Ein", "text": "Ein or EIN can have different meanings:"}
{"id": "43802", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43802", "title": "Julia (Cowboy Bebop)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43803", "revid": "17988", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43803", "title": "Punch and Judy", "text": "Punch and Judy is a very popular puppet show which children in Britain love to watch. It is traditionally performed at the seaside in a small booth which can easily be transported. The characters are all glove puppets. The story is told by a man who calls himself \u201cThe Professor\u201d. He cannot be seen, but he wears the puppets on his hand like gloves and makes them move.\nCharacters.\nPunch wears a jester's motley. He is hunchbacked and his hooked nose almost meets his curved chin. He has a big stick and hits the other characters with his stick, saying \"That's the way to do it!\". He speaks in a funny way called a \"swazzle\". There is also a baby, a crocodile, a policeman and a string of sausages. The simple kind of humour used is called \u201cslapstick\u201d.\nHistory.\nThe Punch and Judy show has its origins in the 16th century Italian commedia dell'arte. This sort of comedy always had the same people in the stories (\u201cstock characters\u201d). The figure of Punch comes from the stock character of Pulcinella, called \"Punchinello\" in English. Punch's wife was originally \"Joan\".\nMay 9, 1662 is said by 'Professors' to be Punch's UK birthday, for that was the first known date on which the figure who later became Mr. Punch was seen in Britain. The diarist Samuel Pepys saw a puppet show using an early version of the Punch character near St. Paul's Church in London's Covent Garden.\nThe British show developed into \"Punch and Judy\". In other countries the stories developed differently. In Germany, Punch is called \"Kasper\" and Judy is \"Grete\". The characters date back to the 18th century in German-speaking countries. In The Netherlands Punch is called \"Jan Klaassen\" and Judy is \"Katrijn\"; in Denmark \"Mester Jackel\"; in Italy \"Pulcinella\" (with \"Teresina\" as the female part); in Russia \"Petruschka\"; in Romania \"Vasilache \"; and in France \"Polichinelle\".\nIn 1827, \"The Tragical Comedy or Comical Tragedy of Punch and Judy\" became the first published Punch and Judy script. In 2006, the Punch and Judy show was named one of 12 icons of Englishness by the British government\u2019s Department for Culture, Media and Sport."}
{"id": "43806", "revid": "3164", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43806", "title": "International Labor Day", "text": ""}
{"id": "43807", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43807", "title": "U.S. State", "text": ""}
{"id": "43819", "revid": "11132", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43819", "title": "Boudicca", "text": ""}
{"id": "43820", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43820", "title": "Boomerang (TV channel)", "text": "Boomerang is the name of the 2nd television networkowned by Cartoon Network. Boomerang was one of the two actual spin-offs of Cartoon Network and Adult Swim showing classic animated cartoons and animated television series from the Hanna-Barbera archives. Cartoon Network showing CN originals and modern cartoons, and Adult Swim showing adult-animates cartoons and adult live action for teens and adults.\nFormerly a segment of programming within the Cartoon Network, the channel was launched at the end of the 20th century and introduced to satellite in April 1, 2000. When it launched back on April 1, 2000 there were bumpers telling you what was coming up next. The current Boomerang coming up next, idents, promos, blocks, and bumpers were used from (April 1, 2000-present)"}
{"id": "43823", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43823", "title": "Boomerang", "text": "A boomerang is a flying tool that is best known for its ability to return to the thrower. In the past, it was made of wood, but most of the modern boomerangs are made of other materials.\nHistory.\nMost people know that Australian Aborigines used boomerangs for hunting. But the oldest boomerang was found in a cave in Poland and is more than 20,000 (twenty thousand) years old. This kind of boomerang does not return to the thrower, but it can fly longer distances and more stably than other things which can be thrown. These days (returning) boomerangs are usually used for recreation. \nTechnical aspects.\nMost of the boomerangs do not have the classical \"L\"-shape. The modern boomerang is special in that it will return to the one who threw it, if it is thrown correctly. However, some boomerangs do not return because their wings do not have the right profile. Most of the boomerangs are made for right-handed use. Left-handed people have to use other boomerangs that are mirror-inverted, or have to throw with their right hand. \nThrowing instructions.\nA boomerang is not thrown like a frisbee. It has to be thrown almost vertically, with an inclination of about 10\u201320 degrees and with a lot of rotation (spin). When facing the wind, throw with an angle of 30\u201345 degrees to the right (left-handed: to the left) of the wind. Be sure to choose a field that is big enough. Watch out for passers-by, and do not throw when people are standing in the range of the boomerang. See also the link provided in the section below.\nClubs.\nThere are a lot of boomerang clubs in many countries all over the world. These clubs organise workshops and tournaments. The best boomerang-throwers come from Australia, France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United States of America. A few years ago, the International Federation of Boomerang Associations (IFBA) was founded to help to spread knowledge about boomerangs."}
{"id": "43829", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43829", "title": "Niflheim", "text": "Niflheim is the world of frost and cold of Norse Mythology. Frost Giants live there. The river Hvergelmir also is there. Yggdrasil has one of its roots in the spring of the river. The serpent Nidhogg gnaws at this root.\nNiflheim is ruled by the Giantess Angrboda."}
{"id": "43830", "revid": "7455911", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43830", "title": "Baldur", "text": "Baldr (also Balder, Baldur or Baldor) is the god of light and radiance, peace and forgiveness in Norse mythology. A member of the \u00c6sir, he is the son of Odin and Frigg, and twin brother to the blind god of darkness, H\u00f6\u00f0r. His wife is called Nanna, with whom he had a son named Forseti, god of justice. Prior to his death, Baldr possessed a ship called Hringhorni, said to be the largest ship ever built. His hall is called Breidablik. \nBased on the Merseburg charms, his Germanic name may have been Phol. \nBaldr once had a nightmare that he would be killed. His mother, Frigg, made all the things across the Nine Realms vow not to hurt him. The mistletoe did not vow, however, as Frigg considered it to be so unimportant that she thought nothing of it. Loki found out that the mistletoe had not vowed, and thus made a spear out of the dreaded plant, and tricked H\u00f6\u00f0r into throwing it at Baldr. Beings from all across the Nine Realms will come to attend his funeral, and Baldr's wife Nanna soon dies of grief. Loki is soon caught and sentenced to punishment; he is bound by the entrails of one of his sons, to face torture as the venom of a massive serpent drips from its fangs onto Loki's eyes. This causes him unimaginable pain, writhing in agony. (The goddess\u00a0Ska\u00f0i\u00a0is responsible for placing the serpent above him). His wife Sigyn is stationed nearby, collecting the drips of venom into a bowl. When the bowl is full, she leaves to empty it, and when she does, the venom drips onto the trickster and gradually eats away at his flesh. Loki's escape from this predicament is the catalyst of Ragnar\u00f6k, as upon his being freed, he will lead the forces of J\u00f6tunheimr and Svart\u00e1lfheimr in a final assault against the gods.\u00a0\nDuring Ragnar\u00f6k, the veils/barriers between the realms will be broken, so Baldr will be able to escape from Helheimr. After the death of Odin at the fangs of the monstrous wolf Fenrir, Baldr and H\u00f6\u00f0r came back to life, meeting with the other survivors in the\"\u00a0\"fields of\u00a0I\u00f0av\u00f6llr\u00a0(Old Norse: \"I\u00f0av\u01ebllr\" -\u00a0\"splendour-plain\"), where\u00a0Asgard once lay. There, they shall rule in place of their father."}
{"id": "43831", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43831", "title": "Baldr", "text": ""}
{"id": "43832", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43832", "title": "Balder", "text": ""}
{"id": "43833", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43833", "title": "Phol", "text": ""}
{"id": "43843", "revid": "5724634", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43843", "title": "Cell (disambiguation)", "text": "A cell can mean:"}
{"id": "43853", "revid": "1021487", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43853", "title": "Prophecy", "text": "A prophecy is a claim of what the future will be like, which is not based on any ordinary source of information. In some ways, prophecies are similar to religion. Not all people believe in prophecy. People that do think they come from God or a god. They are often hard to understand and need interpretation. Very often, they concern one very specific event. People who make prophecies are called prophets. In Ancient Greece, people who made prophecies were called oracles, most notably the Oracle of Delphi. Since then, people like Nostradamus have made prophecies. \nTo prophesy is to make a prophecy. The two words are spelled differently and pronounced differently. \"Prophesy\" is a verb, and \"prophecy\" is a noun.\nThere are many prophecies in the Bible. Some of these warn of punishments to come. There are two kinds of Bible prophecies. Some are conditional, that is, they include the possibility that the punishment can be avoided based on the hearers changing their ways. An example of this is found in the Book of Daniel. Other prophecies are unconditional. That means that the event will happen no matter what the hearers do to avoid it. There are also Bible prophecies that tell of future blessings. Blessings are good things that happen because of God's mercy and forgiveness. Some prophecies contain both punishment and blessings. Jesus made prophecies like this, warning people to believe in Him and live right, to get the blessing instead of the punishment. While some of the prophecies in the bible about future events are hard to understand, the moral warnings from Jesus are not hard to understand. For this reason, some preachers, like Moses, Jesus and other religious leaders who tell people to live a good life are called prophets by their followers even though they may not tell about future events. Muslims consider Muhammad to be a prophet. Even some modern religious leaders have been called prophets by their followers, such as Joseph Smith, Jr., Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and Rev. Billy Graham."}
{"id": "43855", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43855", "title": "Vicious (Cowboy Bebop)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43857", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43857", "title": "Espoo, Finland", "text": ""}
{"id": "43866", "revid": "7220803", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43866", "title": "Anatotitan", "text": ""}
{"id": "43867", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43867", "title": "Ornithomimus", "text": "Ornithomimus was a lightly built fast-running North American feathered dinosaur. \n\"Ornithomimus\" had three toes on each foot, long arms and neck, but a small head. It also had claws on each hand and foot. It had no teeth and weak jaws, which might mean it was omnivorous.\n\"Ornithomimus edmonticus\" was the largest species, 12 ft (3.5 meters) long, 7 feet (2.10 meters) high and weighed about 100-150\u00a0kg. It walked on two legs and looked slightly like an ostrich, except for its long tail. \nThere has been trouble with naming. Some speciments are put in other genera, like Dromiceiomimus and \"Struthiomimus\".\nFeathers.\nIn 1995, 2008 and 2009, three \"O. edmontonicus\" specimens with evidence of feathers were found. Two adults had quill knobs on the lower arm, indicating the former presence of bird-like feather shafts. A juvenile had impressions of long fluffy feathers in the form of hair-like filaments covering the rump, legs and neck. \nThe feather imprints were found in sandstone, previously thought to not be able to support such impressions."}
{"id": "43873", "revid": "7815283", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43873", "title": "Book of Job", "text": "The Book of Job () is the 18th book in the Hebrew Bible or Old Testament. It is one of the books in the class of poetry. \nBeginning.\nThe Bible says \"In the land of Uz\" there lived a man whose name was Job. He feared God and shunned evil. He had seven sons and three daughters, and he owned seven-thousand sheep, three-thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen and five hundred donkeys, and had a large number of servants. He was the greatest man among all the people of the East.\" \n\"When a period of feasting had run its course, Job would send and have them purified. Early in the morning he would sacrifice a burnt offering for each of them, thinking, \"Perhaps my children have sinned and cursed God in their hearts. This was Job's regular custom.\"\nThe Bible also says that Job was a pious, rich, loyal and a man who loved God.\nSatan meets God.\nOne day Satan and the Angels of God went to God. God tells Satan about his servant Job and how good he is. Satan says that the only reason he is like that is because God was good to him and gave him sons and daughters and many animals. Satan asks if he can test Job and God lets him. God tells Satan not to kill Job.\nFirst test.\nThe first test Satan did was to take away all of Job's animals, killing the servants that were with the animals, and killing all of Job's sons and daughters while they were eating together. Even though Satan did these things to Job, Job did not curse God like Satan wanted Job to do.\nSatan meets God again.\nSatan and the Angels went to meet God again. Like before, God talked about how good his servant Job is. Satan says that Job will curse God if he makes Job sick, which he did. This is the last meeting with Satan, the Angels.\nSecond test.\nSatan afflicted sores all over Job's body. Job's wife told him to curse God and die. Job told her that if he said that, that would be foolish. Even though Job lost everything he had and suffered from painful sores all over his body, he did not sin against God by cursing him. Satan had failed in trying to make him sin. This is the final time Satan is mentioned in the Book of Job.\nJob's friends.\nWhen Job's friends heard about the things that happened to him they went to comfort him. Most of the book tells of Job and his friends talking. The names of his friends are Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar. Towards the end of the book, Job's friends start to think that Job is not good because a lot of bad things are happening to him. Job keeps on saying that he is good but he starts to wonder if God really is good.\nJob and God.\nAfter God speaks to Job and his three friends, God asks Job where he was when He created the earth and filled it with amazing things (meaning that it is not possible for man to understand God's ways). God gets very angry at Job's friends for thinking that Job was not a good man and for saying things about God they did not know about, and Job prays for his friends: God answers his prayer. God blesses Job because he did not curse Him. God gives him more than he had before."}
{"id": "43899", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43899", "title": "Abide with Me", "text": "\"Abide with Me\" is a religious song or hymn. It was written by Henry Lyte in 1847, and is typically associated with funerals and solemn events of remembrance. The song is sung at the start of the FA Cup finals.\nLyrics.\nAbide with me; fast falls the eventide;\nThe darkness deepens; Lord with me abide.\nWhen other helpers fail and comforts flee,\nHelp of the helpless, O abide with me.\nSwift to its close ebbs out life\u2019s little day;\nEarth\u2019s joys grow dim; its glories pass away;\nChange and decay in all around I see;\nO Thou who changest not, abide with me.\nNot a brief glance I beg, a passing word;\nBut as Thou dwell\u2019st with Thy disciples, Lord,\nFamiliar, condescending, patient, free.\nCome not to sojourn, but abide with me.\nCome not in terrors, as the King of kings,\nBut kind and good, with healing in Thy wings,\nTears for all woes, a heart for every plea\u2014\nCome, Friend of sinners, and thus bide with me.\nThou on my head in early youth didst smile;\nAnd, though rebellious and perverse meanwhile,\nThou hast not left me, oft as I left Thee,\nOn to the close, O Lord, abide with me.\nI need Thy presence every passing hour.\nWhat but Thy grace can foil the tempter\u2019s power?\nWho, like Thyself, my guide and stay can be?\nThrough cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide with me.\nI fear no foe, with Thee at hand to bless;\nIlls have no weight, and tears no bitterness.\nWhere is death\u2019s sting? Where, grave, thy victory?\nI triumph still, if Thou abide with me.\nHold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes;\nShine through the gloom and point me to the skies.\nHeaven\u2019s morning breaks, and earth\u2019s vain shadows flee;\nIn life, in death, O Lord, abide with me."}
{"id": "43900", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43900", "title": "Hail Mary", "text": "Hail Mary is a Christian prayer to Mary, the mother of Jesus. Most of the prayer comes from the Gospel of Luke. Some things were also added to the prayer during the 13th century (the 1200s). When a person says a Hail Mary, they asks Mary to pray for them.\nIn Roman Catholicism, the Hail Mary makes up the most important part of the Rosary. The Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox also use the prayer. So do many other groups within Christianity, including Anglicans, Independent Catholics, and Old Catholics. Some Protestant denominations also use the Hail Mary. \nHail Mary in the Bible.\nThe Hail Mary uses two phrases from Saint Luke's Gospel. The first is \"Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst women\" (). (In Simple English, this means: \"Be glad. You are full of grace. You are with God. You are blessed.\") The second is \"Blessed art thou amongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb\" (). (This means: \"You and your child (Jesus) are both blessed.\")\nWhen the Hail Mary was first created, it was much shorter than it is now. In Western Europe, in the mid-13th century, the prayer was just a few words. The word \"Mary\" was added after the word \"Hail.\" The entire prayer was \"Hail Mary, full of grace.\" We know this from Saint Thomas Aquinas's writings about the prayer.\nIn the first phrase from Saint Luke's Gospel, the Angel Gabriel is greeting Mary. Like all of Saint Luke's Gospel, this phrase was first written in Koine Greek. The first word of greeting, , \"cha\u00edre\", is translated \"Hail.\" This means \"Rejoice\" or \"Be glad.\" This was a normal greeting in Koine Greek. These greetings are still used in modern Greek.\nThe prayer in Eastern (Greek) tradition.\nThe Hail Mary prayer used by the Eastern Orthodox Church and Eastern Catholic Churches is written: This means:\nThe same thing can be translated differently into English:\n\"Theotokos\" is the title given to Mary in the Eastern Churches. It is a Greek word that means \"the one who gives birth to God.\"\nThe prayer in Western (Latin) tradition.\nThere are different ideas about when the Hail Mary was changed to today's version. The Catholic Encyclopedia says that the Hail Mary was not changed until about 1050.\nSaint Thomas Aquinas said that by the mid-thirteenth century, the Western churches had added only one word - \"Mary\" - to the Biblical verses the prayer came from. Adding her name made it clear that Mary was the person the prayer talked to. However, around the same time, the name \"Jesus\" was also added. This made it clear that Jesus was \"the fruit of [Mary's] womb.\" \nThis means that the Western version of the Hail Mary did not come from the Greek version. The Greek version has very different words, like \"for thou hast given birth to the Saviour of our souls,\" which never appeared in the Western version.\nBefore the 16th century, the Hail Mary greeted and praised Mary. However, during the 16th century, new words were added. These new words asked Mary for help. In 1555, a Dutch Jesuit named Petrus Canisius added these words to his catechism: \"Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners.\" By the time of the Council of Trent eleven years later, this sentence, and some new words, had been added to the Hail Mary. In 1566, the Catechism of the Council of Trent included this sentence in the prayer: \"Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death. Amen.\"\nThis is the last change that has been made to the Hail Mary. \nIn Latin, the prayer is written this way (the macrons are given for pronunciation only and do not appear in the Latin language):\nFor translations from the Latin into various languages, see Wikisource.\nThe prayer in Syriac Orthodox tradition.\nThe Syriac Orthodox Church uses a different version of the Hail Mary. This version is much closer to today's Western form than the Greek form.\nIn this prayer, a leader starts the prayer and everyone else says the rest:\nUsage in the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches, the Hail Mary is very common. It is said in the Greek form, or in translations from the Greek form. The prayer is not said quite as often as in the West. However, it is well-known and is still used often. It also appears in several canons of prayer. It is usually sung three times at the end of Vespers during an All-Night Vigil. It is also said many times during daily prayers.\nVariant Slavonic versions.\nThere are two different versions of the Hail Mary in Church Slavonic:\nThe first version is older. The Old Believers still use this version. So do the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church and the Ruthenian Catholic Church. \nThe second version was created in 1656, as part of changes to liturgy made by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow. This version is used by the Russian Orthodox Church, the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Bulgarian Orthodox Church, and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.\nUsage in the Roman Catholic Church.\nThe Hail Mary is the most important part of the Rosary. The Rosary is a way of praying. It is often used by Latin Rite (Western) Catholics. It is also used in the East (but only by Latinised Ukrainian and Maronite Catholics). \nWhen praying the Rosary, Catholics pray ten sets of Hail Marys. Before each set, they pray one Our Father (also called the \"Pater Noster\" or The Lord's Prayer). After each set of Hail Marys, they pray one 'Glory Be' (\"Gloria Patri\"). One set of these prayers is called a \"decade.\" Usually, Catholics say five decades when they pray the Rosary.\nWhile praying each decade, Catholics think about the four different Mysteries of the Rosary. Each of the Mysteries has to do with things that happened in Jesus' and Mary's lives. The Mysteries include:\nThe Hail Mary is also the most important part of the Angelus. This is a prayer that many Catholics say three times every day. Some Anglicans and Lutherans say the Angelus too.\nAnglican use of the Hail Mary.\nTraditional Anglicans also use the Hail Mary, in mostly the same way as Roman Catholics do. Both groups use the Rosary and say the Angelus. Anglican churches often have statues of the Virgin Mary. \nMany Anglicans pray the Hail Mary. However, in different areas, the prayer may be used differently. This is because the Catholic and Anglican Churches have some different beliefs.\nMusical settings.\nMany people have written music for the Hail Mary (also called the \"Ave Maria\"). \nDuring the Renaissance.\nDuring the Renaissance, the Hail Mary very often set to music by composers, like Jacques Arcadelt, Josquin Desprez, Orlando di Lasso, and Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina. However, at this time (before the Council of Trent), there were still different versions of the prayer. Because of this, some of the earlier Renaissance pieces have different words than today's Hail Mary. For example, Josquin Desprez actually created more than one musical version of the \"Ave Maria\".\nLater versions.\nOne of the most famous musical versions of the prayer was created by Charles Gounod in 1859. He added melody and words to Johann Sebastian Bach's first prelude (the beginning piece of music) from \"The Well-Tempered Clavier\".\nOther famous musical versions of the Hail Mary were written by:\nIn Protestantism.\nProtestant Christianity does not venerate Mary. Some Protestants have used musical versions of the \"Ave Maria,\" but changed the words. For example, \"Ave Redemptor\" uses the music of the \"Ave Maria,\" but focuses on Jesus instead:"}
{"id": "43901", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43901", "title": "Ein (Cowboy Bebop)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43904", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43904", "title": "Studio", "text": "A studio is a place where an artist can work. Studios can be used for many things, such as photography, broadcasting, painting, making movies, television shows, cartoons, or music.\nMovie studio.\nA movie studio is where movies are made and produced. It can be indoors, outdoors, or both. \nTelevision studio.\nA television studio is where video production takes place. It usually contains cameras, microphones, speakers, and spotlights. It is similar to a movie studio. \nRecording studio.\nA recording studio is used for recording music, speech, or other kinds of sound. They are typically divided into three areas: an \"isolation room\" that has soundproofing for playing instruments and to prevent echo, a \"live room\" for general recording, and a \"control room\" to store the recording equipment that DJ's use."}
{"id": "43907", "revid": "813518", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43907", "title": "Electric Light Orchestra", "text": "The Electric Light Orchestra, also known as ELO, were a popular English rock band from the 1970s and early 1980s. Their leader was musician and songwriter Jeff Lynne. Lynne wrote and sang most of their songs. He also produced their recordings. Other members included Richard Tandy on keyboards, Bev Bevan on drums, Mike D'Albuquerque and later Kelly Groucutt on bass guitar. Hugh McDowell, Mik Kaminski, and Melvyn Gale played violin and cello. The orchestra's name is a joke on \"electric light\" and a \"Light Orchestra\" (an orchestra that plays light music).\nHistory.\nThe Move.\nThe band began as a side project of another band, The Move, by musicians Roy Wood and Jeff Lynne. While The Move had added touches of classical music to their pop hits, Wood and Lynne wanted to blend rock music and classical music more closely. Move drummer Bevan joined their project. Wood played nearly all the non-rock instruments on their first album. They made the most of recording studio technology, including multitrack recording and overdubbing.\nTheir first album was titled \"Electric Light Orchestra\". It was released with that name in the United Kingdom. When the album was released in the United States, their American record label, United Artists, did not know the album was titled after the group. They phoned ELO's British label to ask for the title. When nobody answered, \"No Answer\" was written down. Mistaken later for the title, the album appeared in America as \"No Answer\". The band's first single was titled \"10538 Overture\". It became an FM radio favourite. In time, ELO's music became more popular than The Move's had been. The Move disbanded, and Electric Light Orchestra became a full-time group.\nELO.\nRoy Wood decided to leave ELO partway through the recording of the second album. He started another band called Wizzard. Jeff Lynne took over leadership, and McDowell, Kaminski and Gale joined. The album, \"ELO 2\", was finished and released, but was not as well liked as the first. A single on the album was a cover version of Chuck Berry's \"Roll Over Beethoven\". It added parts of many Beethoven compositions to Berry's song. It became another radio hit.\nTheir third album, \"On the Third Day\", included a rock interpretation of \"In the Hall of the Mountain King\". The album had another hit single, titled \"Showdown\". ELO began to tour the United States. They started with small audiences. They became more popular with time, and added theatrical touches to their shows. New contact microphones made it possible for the classical musicians to move around and even dance on stage, as pop musicians did. The audiences enjoyed watching them.\nBy their fourth album, \"Eldorado\", ELO had gone from overdubbing their small membership to recording with real orchestras. They had problems when they worked in their native England. British classical musicians usually kept more to union rules than to the job of making music. They sometimes walked out during recordings. This hurt the process of making their records, so ELO tried a studio called Musicland in Munich, Germany. They liked the way the studio worked, and the German musicians were more devoted. ELO used Musicland many more times.\nTheir next album, \"Face the Music\" (1975), yielded two hit singles, \"Strange Magic\" and \"Evil Woman\". ELO became even more popular. A compilation album, \"Ol\u00e9 ELO\", featured most of their early singles. Three songs from their 1976 album, \"A New World Record\", became worldwide hits. These were \"Telephone Line\", \"Livin' Thing\", and \"Do Ya\", which was a remake of a Move song.\nELO recorded a double album in 1977, \"Out of the Blue\", which included \"Turn to Stone\", \"Sweet Talkin' Woman\", and \"Mr. Blue Sky\", which also became hit records. The band toured worldwide, with a stage set that looked like a UFO, which opened to reveal the band performing inside. Their shows included lots of stage lighting, and laser effects.\nTheir next new album, \"Discovery\", did not appear until 1979. ELO's record label, Jet Records, changed distributors from United Artists to Columbia Records, and this was part of the delay. \"Discovery\" included two singles, \"Shine a Little Love\" and \"Don't Bring Me Down\". \"Don't Bring Me Down\" was the first ELO single to not include any classical instruments. Columbia issued a \"Greatest Hits\" album, which overlapped some of the \"Ol\u00e9 ELO\" songs with later ones.\n1980s.\nELO became less popular during the 1980s. They had fewer hits. They recorded the \"Xanadu\" soundtrack with singer Olivia Newton-John. They also released the albums \"Time\" (with the title song and \"Hold On Tight\" as singles) in 1981, \"Secret Messages\" (with \"Stranger\") in 1983, and finally \"Balance of Power\", which included \"Calling America\", in 1986. By this time the classical musicians had left. Lynne now was recording their parts with synthesizers or session players.\nJeff Lynne was now producing other recording artists, including The Everly Brothers, and stopped working with Electric Light Orchestra in 1986. Most of the remaining members, though, wanted to continue working together and regrouped, first as a band named OrKestra, then later as \"ELO Part II\". These lineups toured for years, playing ELO's old hits and releasing two albums of new material, while Lynne continued his producing career. Lynne also released a solo album, \"Armchair Theatre\", in 1990, and formed the Traveling Wilburys with former Beatle George Harrison.\n2000s.\nLynne recorded an album, \"Zoom\", in 2001, again using the ELO name, but with a new set of musicians. He made a handful of television appearances with the new lineup. They played both old and new songs. He also planned to tour with them. Interest in the band was not strong, though, and most of the shows were cancelled. \nElectric Light Orchestra's music had only a weak presence in popular culture from the mid-1980s until the early 2000s. Their blend of classical and rock music made their music hard to put in radio play lists. ELO's music has made a comeback in the 2000s through its use in movie soundtracks, and also in commercials such as for Monster."}
{"id": "43911", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43911", "title": "Vicious", "text": "The word vicious has several meanings:"}
{"id": "43915", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43915", "title": "Ein (anime)", "text": ""}
{"id": "43916", "revid": "31155", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43916", "title": "Ash", "text": "The term Ash can have different meanings:"}
{"id": "43917", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43917", "title": "Ash tree", "text": "Ash trees are medium to large trees of the genus Fraxinus of the family Oleaceae (Olive-tree like). The family contains between 45 and 65 species. Some of them are evergreen, but most are deciduous. They grow in most parts of the world. The seeds are commonly known as \"keys\" in English. They are a type of fruit known as a samara. Most of the ash species have light-green, oval shaped, leaves. The central stem of the compound leaf has 9 \u2013 13 leaflets (small leaves) in pairs, with one at the tip. There are no stalks to the side leaflets. The leaflets are pointed and toothed, with hairs on the lower surface. The leaves appear relatively late in spring, and are amongst the first to be shed in autumn.\nThe buds are black, sooty or velvety in appearance and are sometimes compared to a Bishop\u2019s Mitre in shape.\nAsh wood is used to make various tools, handles, baseball and softball bats and bows. It also makes very good firewood. Ash trees are also perfect material for old fashion shafts for bow and arrows.\nIn Norse Mythology, the world tree Yggdrasil is commonly thought to be an ash tree. The first man, Askr, was formed from an ash. The first woman was made from an alder. \nThreats.\nThe emerald ash borer (\"Agrilus planipennis\") is a wood-boring beetle. It was accidentally introduced to North America from Asia by solid wood packing material in the late 1980s. It has killed tens of millions of trees in 15 states in the United States and adjacent Ontario in Canada. Research is being done with three Asian wasps which are natural predators of the beetle biological control.\nThe European ash, \"Fraxinus excelsior\", has been affected by the fungus which causes \"ash dieback\". The disease has infected about 90% of Denmark's ash trees. In October 2012 ash dieback was found in mature woodland in Suffolk. In 2016, the ash tree was reported as in danger of extinction in Europe."}
{"id": "43918", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43918", "title": "Ash Wednesday", "text": "Ash Wednesday is the first day of Lent in the Western Christian calendar. It occurs 46 days before Easter. The date is different each year because the date of Easter varies. It can fall as early as February 4 and as late as March 10. \nThose able to and willing to should fast voluntarily between Ash Wednesday and Easter. There are exceptions, though. Pregnant women, sick people, children, and the old usually don't have to. \nAsh Wednesday is a very important part of Lent.\nDates.\nThe dates of Ash Wednesday are:"}
{"id": "43926", "revid": "6005091", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43926", "title": "Valkyrie", "text": "The Valkyries\u00a0(Old Norse:\u00a0\"Valkyrjur,\" singular \"valkyrja\"\u00a0-\u00a0\u201cchoosers of the slain\u201d) are a host of female figures in Norse mythology; they are a group of warrior maidens in service to the chief god Odin. Fierce and respected warriors, they are responsible for choosing who live and die in battle, singling out those worthy of paradise. In the aftermath of battle, the Valkyries carry those whom they have chosen off to Valhalla, an enormous and majestic hall that lies in Asgard. Once there, these e\u00efnherjar, as they are now called, are shared between Odin and Freyja, with half of them going to Valhalla and the other to F\u00f3lkvangr, Freyja's realm. In Valhalla, the e\u00efnherjar feast and make revelry, as they are served and cared for by the Valkyries themselves. \nThe old Norse people thought that Valkyries rode giant wolves, and that they had black wings which correspond to ravens; these two creatures both scavenge corpses on the battlefield symbolizing death and destruction. With the spread of Christianity the idea of what a Valkyrie was like changed more and more to a Romantic description of a beautiful woman. \nRichard Wagner composed some operas, featuring Valkyries (German: \"Walk\u00fcren\", singular: \"Walk\u00fcre\"). These operas are \"Die Walk\u00fcre\", \"Siegfried\", and \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\". They feature a story of a valkyrie Br\u00fcnnhilde, her punishment for disobeying her father, and her falling in love with Siegfried. The music for the opening of Act Three of \"Die Walk\u00fcre\" is very famous. It is called the \"Ride of the Valkyries\"."}
{"id": "43932", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43932", "title": "Zosterops", "text": "Zosterops is a type of bird. There are many different species of Zosterops around the world."}
{"id": "43934", "revid": "719553", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43934", "title": "Dimorphodon", "text": "Dimorphodon was a prehistoric flying pterosaur from the early Jurassic period. It had a big head, a small brain, a tall beak, and two types of teeth. Variation in teeth is rare in pterosaurs. \nLike \"Rhamphorhynchus\", \"Dimorphodon\" is only found in Jurassic strata. It was the first pterosaur found in England, by Mary Anning, in 1828."}
{"id": "43935", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43935", "title": "Cryolophosaurus", "text": "Cryolophosaurus is a theropod dinosaur from the Lower Jurassic period. It is the only theropod to be found in Antarctica. \"Cryolophosaurus\" was discovered in the Jurassic Hanson Formation in the Transantarctic Mountains. The find of this dinosaur was significant because it proves that the dinosaurs lived on all continents and that high latitude climates were tolerated by dinosaurs at that time.\n\"Cryolophosaurus\" is also significant because it is the oldest known tetanuran from any continent: it is the only one from the early Jurassic.\n\"Cryolophosaurus\" had a large crest on the top of the skull, above the eyes. It extends upwards from the skull.\n\"Cryolophosaurus\" was found about from the South Pole but then it was about or so farther north. Also found were the remains of \"Glacialisaurus\" (a large basal sauropodomorph), a crow-sized pterosaur, synapsids, and another unknown theropod. There are also the remains of many plant genera around the same age as fossils of \"Cryolophosaurus\", proving that dense plant matter had once grown on Antarctica's surface before it drifted southward."}
{"id": "43936", "revid": "3164", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43936", "title": "Crylophosaurus", "text": ""}
{"id": "43938", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43938", "title": "Coloborhynchus", "text": "Coloborhynchus was a pterosaur. It has been found in Lower Cretaceous rocks in England and Brazil. It is a similar genus to \"Anhanguera\" and \"Ornithocheirus\".\nThe type specimen of \"Coloborhynchus\" is known only from a partial upper jaw. It can only be distinguished from its relatives by its unique combination of tooth socket positions. In \"Coloborhynchus\", the two front teeth pointed forward and were higher on the jaw than the other teeth, while the next three pairs of teeth pointed to the sides. The final two pairs of teeth in this specimen point downward. Finally, a unique oval depression was located below the first pair of teeth.\nThe possible species \"Coloborhynchus capito\" is the largest toothed pterosaur known. A specimen from the Cambridge Greensand has a very large upper jaw tip which displays the typical teeth which distinguish \"C. capito\" from other species. The jaw tip is nearly 10 cm tall and 5.6 cm wide, with teeth up to 1.3 cm in base diameter. If the proportions of this specimen was the same as other known species of \"Coloborhycnhus\", the total skull length could have been up to 75 cm, leading to an estimated wingspan of ."}
{"id": "43940", "revid": "127811", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43940", "title": "Julia", "text": ""}
{"id": "43942", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43942", "title": "Alder", "text": "Alder is the common name for about 30 kinds of trees and shrubs of the Alnus genus. They are a part of the birch family (\"Betulaceae\"). Most of them are smaller in size. Leaves are mostly deciduous, only very few alders are evergreen.\nAlder trees are found in all parts of the northern hemisphere and they are often found on poor and/or wet soil. Alders have simple leaves with a toothed edge. The male flowers are in the form of hanging catkins and the female flowers are much smaller catkin-like structures \"(see image).\" The pollen is transferred from the male to the female flower by the wind. The female flower parts develop into little, green, rounded cone-like fruits which turn brown in autumn and open to release the seeds. \nThe best known species are the , which can be seen throughout Europe. The largest is probably the , native to North America. It reaches about 32\u201335 metres in height. The widespread is a shrub, rarely more than 5m high. The commonest alder in the UK is the Black Alder, also called the Common Alder or European Alder. \nAlder is a preferred tree for bees, especially in spring. It is also used to make charcoal. "}
{"id": "43944", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43944", "title": "Norse dwarves", "text": ""}
{"id": "43945", "revid": "5629422", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43945", "title": "Futabasaurus", "text": "Futabasaurus was a plesiosaur from the Upper Cretaceous. A complete skeleton of one has not been found. It is not known very well. \n\"Futabasaurus\" is the first elasmosaurid found in Japan. The type species is \"F. suzukii\". Many of the bones of the type specimen show apparent scavenging or predation by sharks."}
{"id": "43946", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43946", "title": "Ovum", "text": "An ovum (Latin: \"egg\", plural: ova) is the name for the haploid female reproductive cell, or gamete. Both animals and land plants (embryophytes) produce ova. \nMammals.\nHumans.\nOva are made and released by a female's ovaries. At birth, a female has all of her eggs, and from puberty, she releases an egg once a month until none are left. This is called oogenesis. \nWhen the ovum is fertilised by a male's sperm, it becomes a zygote, which develops into a new organism. The ovum is fertilized inside the female body, and the embryo then develops inside the uterus, being fed by the mothers placenta.\nThe ovum is the largest cell in the human body. You can see it without a microscope. The human ovum is between 100 and 200 \u00b5m long. They are nevertheless much smaller than the cleidoic eggs laid externally by reptiles and birds, which is why they need a long period of internal development in the womb.\nOther mammals.\nThe sexual cycle is quite different in other mammals, whose females are only receptive during the 'heat' part of their estrous cycle when eggs are released from the ovary. Sexual activity then continues for a few days, then ceases entirely until the next heat.\nPlants.\nIn many plants, ova are made inside archegonia through meiosis. The archegonium has a long 'neck' with the egg cell inside. When the egg is mature, the neck opens and sperm swims in to fertilize the egg.\nIn flowering plants, the female gametes are made of only eight cells, called the embryo sac, inside the ovule. The cell closest to the opening of the embryo sac becomes the egg cell. When pollinated, sperm swims into the embryo sac and fertilizes the egg. The zygote then develops into an embryo inside the ovule."}
{"id": "43947", "revid": "508885", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43947", "title": "Ovule", "text": "Ovules produce the female reproductive cells which get fertilized during sexual reproduction in seed plants. The word literally means \"small egg.\"\nThe megagametophyte (also called the \"embryo sac\" in flowering plants) is inside the ovule. The megagametophyte produces the egg cell."}
{"id": "43948", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43948", "title": "Horn (musical instrument)", "text": "The horn is a brass instrument. It developed from the horns that some animals have on their heads. Modern horns are often called French horns.\nThe hunting horn.\nHorns were often used during hunting. These early brass instruments were round so that the hunter could put his arm through it and carry it on his shoulder and blow it while riding a horse. The riders could send messages to one another by blowing particular notes.\nThe horn in the orchestra.\nIn the 17th century the modern orchestra was developing. Orchestras played for operas. Opera stories in those days were usually about gods and goddesses or kings and queens. There was often a hunting scene in the story. Hunters were asked to come and play their horns in the orchestra for these scenes. This is how the horn became an orchestral instrument.\nA brass instrument gives one basic note. Changing the pressure with the lips produces a few other notes. Gradually horn players discovered that if they put their right hand in the bell they could change the basic note. This made it possible to play lots of different notes. When Mozart wrote his horn concertos he was writing for a hand horn. When a note is played using the hand in the bell it makes the note sound different: more muffled (a bit like speaking while covering your mouth with your hand). A Mozart horn concerto sounds very different when played on a modern horn.\nAnother way to change the notes on a horn was to use crooks. These are like extensions to the horn. The longer the tube the lower the note, so adding a crook (an extra circle) would give a lower basic note.\nThe modern horn.\nBy the 1830s the modern horn with three valves had been invented. These valves change the length of the tube, so that the horn had now become chromatic i.e. it could play all the notes including sharps and flats. Composers like Richard Wagner and Richard Strauss wrote complicated music for the horn which would never have been possible on the natural, valveless instruments. However, some composers preferred the sound of the natural horn. Brahms wrote for the natural horn when he wrote his \"Horn Trio\" for piano, violin and horn. Benjamin Britten, in his \"Serenade for tenor, horn and strings\", asks for the horn to played naturally (without valves) for the fanfare at the beginning to make it sound like a hunting horn.\nThe horn has a conical bore. This means that the tubing gradually becomes wider (a trumpet and trombone have a cylindrical bore): the tubing is the same thickness all the way along. The modern horn has 6.4 metres of tubing. It makes a beautiful, warm sound, but it is quite hard to play because the mouthpiece is small and the harmonics (the notes that can be played by changing the lip pressure) are very close together. The horn is a transposing instrument, usually in F (a written C sounds like the F below).\nAt the end of the 19th century the so-called \u201cdouble horn\u201d was invented, which was like a combination of a horn in F and a horn in B flat.\nIn the 18th century there were generally two horns in an orchestra. This became three or four in the 19th century, and some large orchestras now may have up to eight horns."}
{"id": "43949", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43949", "title": "Valhalla", "text": "In Norse mythology, Valhalla\u00a0(Old Norse:\u00a0\"Valh\u00f6ll\" -\u00a0\u201chall of the slain\u201d) is an enormous and majestic hall in Asgard, headed by Odin. Described as a \"warrior's paradise,\" it is here that the souls of those who are slain in battle go, chosen and guided by the\u00a0Valkyries, a group of warrior maidens in service to Odin. Once they are there, these\u00a0e\u00efnherjar, as they are known, make revelry, as they\u00a0feast on the beast known as\u00a0S\u00e6hr\u00edmnir, having their fill of mead made from the udders of the female goat\u00a0Hei\u00f0r\u00fan. The feast is prepared by\u00a0Andhr\u00edmnir\u00a0(Old Norse: \u201cthe one exposed to soot\u201d), the cook of the gods, in his cauldron,\u00a0Eldhr\u00edmnir\u00a0(Old Norse: \u201cfire-sooty\u201d). Outside of Valhalla\u2019s doors lies\u00a0Glasir\u00a0(Old Norse: \u201cgleaming\u201d),\u00a0a massive tree that grows golden leaves, while its ceiling is adorned with golden shields. The tree\u00a0L\u00e6ra\u00f0r\u00a0stands atop the great hall, where both\u00a0Hei\u00f0r\u00fan\u00a0and the stag\u00a0Eik\u00feyrnir\u00a0(Old Norse: \u201coak-thorny\u201d)\u00a0graze its foliage. During Ragnar\u00f6k, the\u00a0e\u00efnherjar\u00a0will aid Odin in his battle against\u00a0Surtr\u00a0and his forces. "}
{"id": "43950", "revid": "3650", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43950", "title": "French horn", "text": ""}
{"id": "43954", "revid": "6573315", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43954", "title": "Horn (anatomy)", "text": "Horns are part of the body of some animals. They grow on the animal's head. They are projections (things that stick out) made of hard skin. The horn has a lot of keratin in it, the same protein that is in human hair and nails. \nNormally horned animals will have two horns, but the rhinoceros has just one horn in the middle of its head.\nAnimals often use their horns for fighting one another.\nThousands of years ago people used the horns of dead animals for musical instruments (see horn (postal horn)). In later times, they were used for carrying gunpowder."}
{"id": "43955", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43955", "title": "Mead", "text": "Mead is a fermented alcoholic drink. It is made from honey. Its history may be as old as that of beer. It is made by mixing honey, water, and yeast. Some kinds of mead also include spices or fruit. Mead is sometimes called \"honey wine\".\nArchaeologists discovered that people made mead 9,000 years ago. Mead was described in the Rigveda, which is a Hindu religious text. Mead is popular in Central Europe and the Balkans. Mead is also made in Ethiopia and South Africa."}
{"id": "43957", "revid": "83511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43957", "title": "ACDC", "text": ""}
{"id": "43958", "revid": "7414145", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43958", "title": "Ull", "text": "In Norse mythology, Ull (or Ullr or Uller) is the son of Sif, and the stepson of Thor. He is thought to be the god of Winter, of hunting, of hand-to-hand combat, and of the willow tree. His name means \"glory\". He was said to be a great archer and skier who left blazing trails across the sky. \nFor this reason he is celebrated in modern times as the god of skiing. His name is used as a name for ski lodges like the House of Ullr at Thredbo, New South Wales. ULLR Labs make smartphone applications to help people avoid avalanches."}
{"id": "43959", "revid": "1092081", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43959", "title": "Thrud", "text": "\u00der\u00fa\u00f0r, sometimes written as Thr\u00fad, is a daughter of the gods Sif and Thor in Norse mythology. Although her name is mentioned in the \"Prose Edda\", it gives no direct powers or other information about her. Thr\u00fad is also one of the valkyries described in \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" (stanza 36). Thr\u00fad is the goddess of power, of trees, flowers and the grass. Her name means strength in Old Norse."}
{"id": "43960", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43960", "title": "Hugin and Munin", "text": "Hugin and Munin are two ravens, commonly associated with Odin. They bring Odin news from the world, when he sends them out. Their names translate as thought and memory, respectively."}
{"id": "43961", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43961", "title": "Hugin", "text": ""}
{"id": "43962", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43962", "title": "Munin", "text": ""}
{"id": "43964", "revid": "6798428", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43964", "title": "Hel (goddess)", "text": "Hel is a goddess of Norse mythology. Her father is Loki, and her mother is Angrbo\u00f0a, a giantess. Her siblings are J\u00f6rmungandr and Fenrir. Her task is to reign over the realm of the dead, also called Hel or Neifelheim, where the dead peacefully go to in the afterlife to wait until Ragnarok, the end of the gods and Asgard. The people who go there are those who did not die in battle, but instead died a peaceful death. She watches over those who die, but are not chosen by the Valkyries to go to Valhalla or chosen by Freyja to enter her household. \nHel is half dead and half alive due to complications of her father and her mother. Half of her face is beautiful, like that of her father, while the other half is ugly and difficult to look at like her mother. From the waist up the skin is pink, alive and healthy. Below the waist is dead and rotting. This is the personification of the belief that death can be a good thing or a tragedy. Hel's underworld is not the Christian hell of eternal punishment for all, but a world of rewards or punishment for each as earned in life."}
{"id": "43973", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43973", "title": "Runestone", "text": "A Runestone or Rune stone is a large stone, with runes inscribed on it, dating from the early Middle Ages. Currently, about 6000 such stones are known to exist in Scandinavia. About half of them date from the tenth and eleventh century, and were found in Sweden. Most of them are like grave stones. They announce the life and death of a local person. About 10 percent of the known stones tell about the travels and deaths of persons abroad. Some of these texts are similar to what Scandinavians who travelled to Byzantium have written in Latin."}
{"id": "43983", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43983", "title": "Rune stone", "text": ""}
{"id": "43984", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43984", "title": "Balcony", "text": "A balcony is a kind of floor at a certain height, which stands out from the building. Usually, there is some kind of balustrade so people do not fall off.\nThere is a possibility to protect the balcony with a glazing. So called balcony glazings are important for certain areas that are heavily influenced by weather or noise. Assemblers, which create designs and static evaluation for the balcony glazing, are necessary to integrate the glazing conform with regulations and laws. Because if the glazing is assembled in the wrong way, parts could fall off and damage property or persons.\nUnlike a terrace, balconies and also their balustrade need a static evaluation, so they don't take damage over time and can permanentely hold their visitors."}
{"id": "43989", "revid": "6501", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43989", "title": "14 February", "text": ""}
{"id": "43990", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43990", "title": "Bergstra\u00dfe Route", "text": "Bergstra\u00dfe (\"Mountain Road\") is the name of a mountain route, and the area around it, which stretches across the western edge of the Odenwald in southern Hesse and northern Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany. \nThe name \"Bergstra\u00dfe\" also refers to the district Kreis Bergstra\u00dfe, the independent wine-growing region of Hessische Bergstra\u00dfe and the Badische Bergstra\u00dfe in the Baden wine-growing area.\nRoute.\nThe route goes almost straight from north to south at the spot where the Rhine lowlands meet the western edge of the Odenwald. The name comes from the road's route along the foot of the mountains, the Rhine lowlands once being too damp to build a road there.\nThe route mostly follows the modern B3 road. It begins in Darmstadt and, after passing through Eberstadt, splits into the \"Old Bergstra\u00dfe\" and the \"New Bergstra\u00dfe\", which goes somewhat farther to the west. The two routes meet again at Zwingenberg.\nIn Weinheim-L\u00fctzelsachsen the route splits into an old and a new Bergstra\u00dfe again. The new one passes west of the old route as far as Heidelberg-Handschuhsheim, where the two meet once more. The route carrying on after the Neckar from Heidelberg to Wiesloch is still usually known as the Bergstra\u00dfe, even though the type of country and climate typical of the Bergstra\u00dfe is no longer as clear."}
{"id": "43993", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43993", "title": "Bergstrasse", "text": ""}
{"id": "43998", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43998", "title": "Waistband", "text": ""}
{"id": "44000", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44000", "title": "Caucasus", "text": "The Caucasus or Caucasia is a region in Eurasia bordered on the south by Iran, on the southwest by Turkey, on the west by the Black Sea, on the east by the Caspian Sea, and on the north by Russia. The Persian name for the region is \"Qafq\u00e2z\". Caucasia includes the Caucasus Mountains and surrounding lowlands. \nThe Caucasus Mountains are commonly known as a line between Asia and Europe, and the lands in Caucasia are different considered to be in one or both continents. The northern portion of the Caucasus is known as the Ciscaucasus and the southern portion as the Transcaucasus. The highest peak in the Caucasus is Mount Elbrus (5,642 m) which, in the western Ciscaucasus in Russia, is generally considered the highest point in Europe.\nMyths and Legends.\nThe Biblical Mount Ararat where Noah's Ark landed is known as the landmark of the ancient Armenian realm. The peak of Ararat is seasonally capped with snow. In Greek mythology, the Caucasus or Kaukasos was one of the pillars supporting the world. Prometheus was chained there by Zeus. The Roman poet Ovid placed Caucasus in Scythia and said it was a cold and stony mountain which was the abode of personified hunger."}
{"id": "44001", "revid": "368284", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44001", "title": "Hamidian massacres", "text": "The Hamidian massacres took place around 1895 until 1897. The estimated number of Armenians killed are around 100,000 - 300,000.\nThese events are known by the Armenians as the \"Great Massacres\". The Armenians believed the Hamidian measures showed the extension of the Turkish state to do a systematic policy of murder and plunder against a small population. The Armenian revolutionary groups started around the end of the Russo-Turkish War of 1878 and grew with the first introduction of Article 166 of the Ottoman Penal code 166, and the raid of Erzerum Cathedral. \nArticle 166 was meant to control the possession of arms, but it was used to target Armenians by not letting them possess arms. Local Kurdish tribes were armed to attack the defenseless Armenian population. Some diplomats said that the aim of these groups was to commit massacres so as to show counter-measures, and to invite \"foreign powers to intervene,\" as Istanbul's British Ambassador Sir Philip Currie seen in March 1894. Even some Turkish authors admit the that this was just a pretext for the massacres."}
{"id": "44002", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44002", "title": "Alfred Pampalon", "text": "Alfred Pampalon (24 November 1867 \u2013 30 September 1896) was born in the city of L\u00e9vis, Quebec, and died at 28 in Sainte-Anne-de-Beaupr\u00e9. He was a Redemptorist priest known for having a deep faith in God and a deep love of Mary. He is a patron for people with addictions.\nHis character and early life.\nHe was known to be a modest, prayerful person, and was thought of as honest and pure by his classmates. \nReligion in his life.\nPampalon was devoted to Mary; before going to a Redemptorists' monastery, he went to a statue of Mary and asked her to pray for the monks to let him join. The Monastery allowed him to join despite his poor health, because they saw his strong desire to become a Redemptorists father. While training to become a Roman Catholic priest his fellow students asked him how he managed to study philosophy so well, and he replied he imagined Mary was asking him the questions. He would make his head touch the floor and pray to her daily, and while dying he would pray to her throughout the day.\nLater years and death.\nAt the age of 26, Pampalon found out that he had tuberculosis. During this time he stayed devoted to God, moving back to Quebec to be a priest there. While dying from tuberculosis he gave communion, baptized people, and heard confessions. Before his death he was in constant pain, and would spend his days in prayer. The night before he priest died, he said in a soft voice \"O death..., O holy death..., come..., do come! O divine Savior..., my hope is in your merits... I am happy... to suffer for you! I want to go to Heaven... to see you and Mary,\" After this he got up and sang the Magnificat in a loud voice. He has become known as the \"Hail Mary Saint\" because of this."}
{"id": "44004", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44004", "title": "Armenian oblast", "text": "Armenian oblast (1828-1840 AD) was an oblast (province) around eastern Armenia. It was created by the Russians when they took over Eastern Armenia, a large number of Armenians moved back from Persia to Armenia and about 35000 Muslims (Azeris, Kurds and Lezgins) and various nomadic tribes left the area."}
{"id": "44005", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44005", "title": "St. Hripsime", "text": "St. Hripsime is a church in Ejmiadzin, Armenia. It was built in 618. It is one of the oldest churches in Armenia. St. Hripsime is also known for its fine Armenian architecture. This style of architecture was used again when they built many churches in Armenia."}
{"id": "44006", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44006", "title": "Armenian language", "text": "The Armenian language is an Indo-European language that is spoken by Armenians.\nIt is the official language of Armenia and the occupied region of Nagorno-Karabakh. The language is also widely spoken by Armenian communities all over the world. It is written by its own Armenian alphabet. The language has two standard forms: Eastern Armenian and Western Armenian."}
{"id": "44007", "revid": "7478576", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44007", "title": "Armenian diaspora", "text": "The Armenian diaspora is a term used to describe the communities of Armenians living outside of Armenia. Of the total Armenian population living worldwide which was estimated to be 8,000,000 in 2004, only about 3,000,000 live in Armenia and about 120,000 in the de facto independent Republic of Artsakh."}
{"id": "44008", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44008", "title": "Aspect", "text": "Aspect may mean:"}
{"id": "44009", "revid": "744335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44009", "title": "Carol Vorderman", "text": "Carol Jean Vorderman (born 24 December 1960) is a British television presenter. She was born in Bedford and raised in Prestatyn, North Wales. Her father was Dutch; her mother is Welsh. She studied engineering at Sidney Sussex College, University of Cambridge. She is best known for having picked the letters and numbers for the Channel 4 game show \"Countdown\". She is a regular panellist on ITV1 talk show \"Loose Women\". She was a contestant in the second series of \"Strictly Come Dancing\" in 2004. In 2013 she presented a series about cooking on ITV called \"Food Glorious Food\". She has written books about detox diets."}
{"id": "44011", "revid": "838831", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44011", "title": "Automobiles of the 1920s", "text": "Automobiles have changed considerably since 1893 due to the more efficient ways for new cars to be developed and designed. The car industry was thriving in the 1920s. There were many new types of cars. In the beginning of the 1920s many of the soldiers returning from World War I bought automobiles. People started to see that having a car would make traveling much easier. Soon almost every American family had a car. Ford was the big car maker but other companies were also big at the time. Ford cars, such as the Ford Model T, were popular because they were cheap and very reliable. When new Ford models came out people would always get the newer version.\nThe automobiles industry in Europe and the United States expanded greatly during the 1920s. There were many changes in the industry and new types of cars. Having a car allowed families and individuals to travel more easily. Famous cars of the 1920s included:"}
{"id": "44015", "revid": "4607504", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44015", "title": "Norns", "text": "The Norns are female deities in Norse mythology who govern fate. Their names are Urd (what has been), Verdandi (what is) and Skuld (what is to come). Skuld is also the name of a Valkyrie.\nThe Norns are at the base of the ash tree Yggdrasil (or, according to some versions, above the Bifr\u00f6st bridge). They spin threads and weave the tapestry of fates. Each person's life is a thread in their loom. The length of the thread is the length of the person's life. Even the gods have their threads and are therefore not immortal, though the Norns hide the strings from the gods. So everything is set out beforehand. There is no luck, there is no randomness, everything is determined by destiny.\nThe Greeks called deities similar to the Norns Moirae, and the Romans called them Parcae.\nThe three Norns appear at the beginning of Richard Wagner's opera G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung and foretell the downfall of the gods when a thread of fate breaks."}
{"id": "44022", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44022", "title": "J\u00f6rmungand", "text": ""}
{"id": "44026", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44026", "title": "Liopleurodon", "text": "Liopleurodon was a large species of Pliosaur. It was an apex predator in the Upper Jurassic seas, around 160\u2013155 million years ago. It grew up to 6.39 metres (21 feet) long. It was a relative of \"Pliosaurus\" and \"Kronosaurus\". It preyed on other marine animals such as \"Ophthalmosaurus\".\nSome fossil remains excavated from the Kimmeridge Clay formation in England indicate a much larger animal, perhaps up to long. However, these have not been put in the genus \"Liopleurodon\". \n\"Liopleurodon\"'s nose allowed it to smell underwater. It could smell prey from some distance away. Despite needing to breath air, Liopleurodon spent its entire life at sea and was unable to leave the water. Consequently, it would have given birth to its young alive and may have visited shallower water to breed."}
{"id": "44027", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44027", "title": "Libonectes", "text": "Libonectes was a plesiosaur related to \"Elasmosaurus\". It lived 80 to 65 million years ago. It grew up to 12 metres long. It was a predator of small fish; the fish ate plankton in the upper pelagic layers of the sea."}
{"id": "44029", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44029", "title": "Dimetrodon", "text": "Dimetrodon was a pelycosaur (early Synapsida) from the first part of the Permian period (about 295\u2013272 million years ago). \n\"Dimetrodon\" walked on four legs and had a tall, curved skull with large teeth of different sizes set along the jaws. Most fossils have been found in the southwestern United States, from red beds in Texas and Oklahoma. The largest known species of \"Dimetrodon\" is \"D.\u00a0angelensis\" at and the smallest is \"D.\u00a0teutonis\" at .\n\"Dimetrodon\" was a carnivore, probably the top predator in its environment. Its main feature is the large sail on its back formed by elongated spines extending upwards from the vertebrae. The spines would be joined by skin. The general opinion of palaeontologists is that it was a temperature-regulating device. The idea is that the animal could warm up in the early morning by placing itself broadside to the Sun, and later could cool off in the shade, or arrange for its body to get less sunlight. At this stage in evolution, no land animals were homoiotherms. Very likely the sail was also used for sexual or territorial signalling. In which case, the skin would be coloured. This, of course, is supposition, but it does make sense of the animal's most extraordinary feature.\nIn evolutionary terms, \"Dimetrodon\" was a synapsid, a line of land animals which eventually gave rise to the mammals. It was not on the direct line of descent, but a good example of the evolutionary grade typical of Permian synapsids."}
{"id": "44030", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44030", "title": "Spinosaurus", "text": "Spinosaurus (which means 'spiny lizard') was a huge semi-aquatic dinosaur from the Cretaceous, 112 to 93.5 million years ago. It had paddle-like feet and nostrils on top of its crocodile-like head. This would let it submerge as a crocodile does.\nThe same research suggests it was perhaps larger than \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", but more clumsy on land, moving as a quadruped. All these ideas had been suggested before. The discovery of a more complete skeleton made palaeontologists think they were correct. The fossil was found in Morocco by a private collector who let scientists examine it.\n\"Spinosaurus\" bones were first discovered in Egypt in 1912 by German paleontologist Ernst Stromer in 1915. Two species, \"S. aegyptiacus\" and \"S. marocannus\", are recognized by many paleontologists, but there may only be one. \"Spinosaurus\" looked like \"Baryonyx\" except it was larger and more heavily built. Six specimens of \"Spinosaurus\" have been uncovered. Apparently, good material was destroyed in Munich in a 1944 bombing raid.\nDescription.\n100 million years ago, the Sahara Desert was wet. Animals included the pterosaur \"Alanqa\", types of giant crocodiles, and theropod predators the size of \"T. rex\". The largest predator was \"Spinosaurus\". In the past, it was thought that Spinosaurus aegyptiacus was bipedal. In 2014, scientists believed that \"Spinosaurus aegyptiacus\" was quadrupedal because it is front-heavy. If \"Spinosaurus aegyptiacus\" were to walk on two legs, it would topple. \"Spinosaurus\" probably walked on its knuckles. Spinosaurus's legs were short. \"Spinosaurus\"'s jaws were designed to catch slippery prey like fish. Scientists say that \"Spinosaurus\" spent most of its time in the water and it was a semi-aquatic dinosaur. \n\"Spinosaurus\" was larger than \"Tyrannosaurus\". Estimates published in 2005, 2007, and 2008 suggested that it was between 15 metres (50 ft) in length and 7 to 20.9 tonnes (7.7 to 23.0 short tons) in weight. A new estimate published in 2014 and based on a more complete specimen, supported the earlier research, finding that \"Spinosaurus\" could reach lengths of over 15 m (49 ft). It had a two meter high sail on its back like \"Dimetrodon\". Several uses have been suggested for this sail, such as to help control its body temperature, as a way to attract a mate, and to intimidate or frighten enemies. It lived in what is now the Sahara Desert, but which then was mangrove forests alongside shoreline conditions, tidal flats and channels. \nThe skull of \"Spinosaurus\" was long and narrow like that of a modern gharial. \"Spinosaurus\" is known to have eaten fish. Evidence suggests that it lived both on land and in water like a modern crocodilian.\nMedia.\nIt was featured as the main dinosaur in the 2001 film Jurassic Park III where it fights and kills a T-Rex. It has also appeared on postage stamps in several countries, and many toy companies have made models of \"Spinosaurus\"."}
{"id": "44036", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44036", "title": "Rhamphorhynchus (animal)", "text": ""}
{"id": "44037", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44037", "title": "Rhamhorhynychus", "text": ""}
{"id": "44038", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44038", "title": "Rhamhorhynchus", "text": ""}
{"id": "44040", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44040", "title": "Anhanguera", "text": "Anhanguera, which means 'Old Devil', was a pterodactyl from the Upper Cretaceous. It was found in the Santana Formation of Brazil, and specimens from England are also placed in this genus. \nIt ate fish and grew to 14 feet (4.5 meters) across. The species \"Anhanguera piscator\" is now placed in the genus \"Coloborhynchus\"."}
{"id": "44041", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44041", "title": "Rhamphorhynchus", "text": "Rhamphorhynchus is a genus of long-tailed pterosaurs in the Upper Jurassic. It is the best-known of the long-tailed pterosaurs, the sub-order Rhamphorynchoidea. \n\"Rhamphorhynchus\" had a long tail, stiffened with ligaments, which ended in a small diamond-shaped rudder on the end of its tail which helped keep it stable when it was flying.\nThe jaws of \"Rhamphorhynchus\" housed needle-like teeth, which were angled forward, with a curved, sharp, beak-like tip lacking teeth. Their diet was mainly fish and insects.\nLike other pterosaurs, its body was covered with hairs, which suggests it had termperature regulation ('hot-blooded') and a high rate of metabolism. This is also found in birds and bats, and seems necessary for active flight.\nThe genus was quite successful: it is the most common pterosaur found in the Solnhofen limestone beds in Bavaria, Germany. These are the same strata where \"Archaeopteryx\" was found.\nRhamphorhynchoids.\nThis early group flourished from the Upper Triassic to the end of the Jurassic. When we first see them in the fossil record they have developed three families, so biologists know their early evolution is not yet revealed.p240, 246 These three families are represented by the three genera \"Rhamphorhynchus\", \"Dimorphodon\" and \"Eudimorphodon\". This sub-order was the earliest kind or pterosaur, which were succeeded by the more 'derived' short-tailed pterosaurs, the Pterodactyloids, such as \"Pterodactylus\". In the Upper Jurassic both the two sub-orders were extant (living).\nThe group always has a long tail, stiffened by rod-like bony tendons to keep it straight. This indicates their flight was extremely stable, which means it kept on course, and did not dart about much. This feature is also found in \"Archaeopteryx\" and in early bats, and in insects like dragonflies. \nIt can be interpreted like this. To dart about quickly requires special advanced brains and reflexes to keep control. Later birds and pterosaurs had extra 'control wiring' in their brains, but early ones did not. The evidence for this is the extra size of pterodactyl and bird brains compared with the reptile brains the groups started out with. That much of this increase is connected to seeing and flying is clear from how bird brains work.\nThe analogy would be planes. Early planes were highly stable, and so are airliners. Fighter planes are fundamentally much less stable, and have to be in order to jink about. This needs such fast reactions that the details are worked out by computer, with the pilot indicating where to go. \nIt requires more 'brains' to control an unstable craft than it does a stable one. And the same principle applies to pterosaurs, birds and bats. Early birds, bats, pterosaurs and insects were all more stable, with tails or (insects) long abdomens. This helped the flying animal to keep on track, which is what we mean by 'stable'. \nAll species in the group have teeth. The group died out at the end of the Jurassic, which suffered a minor extinction event.p270\nTaxonomy.\nThis classification is simple, but unfortunately it is paraphyletic, because the two suborders are not sister groups. But there is not enough evidence to see which earlier group the pterodactyloids arose from. So this is the best we can do: "}
{"id": "44043", "revid": "555269", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44043", "title": "Zhejiangopterus", "text": "Zhejiangopterus is a pterosaur that was found in China. It lived in the late Cretaceous. \nAt least six specimens of adults have been found. \"Zhejiangopterus\" was a moderately large pterosaur. Its wingspan was first estimated at five metres (16.4 feet). Later estimates reduced this to about 3.5 metres (11 feet). \nIts skull was long, low, perfectly arched, and lacked a \"keel\" or any other crest sometimes seen in related species. The beak was long, thin, sharply pointed, and lacked teeth. The cervical vertebrae were elongated. The first six dorsal vertebrae had fused together. This helped the chest keep stable against the forces generated by the wings.\nSeveral pairs of belly ribs were preserved. Its upper leg bone was half the size of its upper arm bone, and strong and thin. The wings were short but robust"}
{"id": "44044", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44044", "title": "Tupuxuara", "text": "Tupuxuara was a pterosaur that lived 112 million years ago. It was found in the Santana Formation, the remains of an inland sea. \nSome species were quite small, but the largest skull (length 130 cms) suggests a wingspan of 5.5 metres. It was an Azdarchid pterosaur, the same group as \"Quetzalcoatlus\"."}
{"id": "44046", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44046", "title": "Anurognathus", "text": "Anurognathus was a genus of small rhamphorhynchoid pterosaurs which lived 150 million years ago, in the Upper Jurassic period. It had a short head with pin-like teeth for catching insects. It was found in the Solnhofen limestone, the same place as \"Archaeopteryx\". They grew up to 35 cms wingspan.\nAlthough it is in the long-tailed pterosaur group Rhamphorhynchoidea, its tail was comparatively short. This was an adaptation which made it more manoeuvrable in hunting. According to D\u00f6derlein the reduced tail of \"Anurognathus\" was similar to the pygostyle of modern birds. \nWith an estimated wingspan of fifty centimetres (20 inches) and a nine centimetre long body (skull included), its weight was limited: forty grammes for a specimen with a 35 centimetre wingspan. \nLater a second, smaller, specimen was found, probably of a subadult individual. Its slab and counterslab are separated and both were sold to private collections. This second fossil is more complete and better articulated. It shows impressions of a large part of the flight membrane and under UV-light remains of the muscles of the thigh and arm become visible. It provided new information on many points of the anatomy. The skull was shown to have been very short and broad, wider than long."}
{"id": "44048", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44048", "title": "Thirty-Nine Articles", "text": "The Thirty-Nine Articles are the historic statements of Anglican beliefs. The Articles were not meant to be a complete statement of the Christian faith. They are a statement of the position of the Church of England against the Roman Catholic Church and against Protestants. \nHistory.\nThe articles were made in 1563, under the direction of Archbishop Matthew Parker, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I. They are based on the Forty-Two Articles written under the direction of Thomas Cranmer in 1552 and passed under Edward VI of England in 1553. They are printed in the Book of Common Prayer and other Anglican prayer books. Priests, deacons, and bishops of the Church of England have to take an oath that what is said in the Articles is \"agreeable to the Word of God.\" Other Anglican churches do not make such a requirement.\nThe Thirty-Nine Articles were needed because at that time in English history it was not possible to find an agreement about Protestantism. Rather than have the church become divided, they needed a way to list the essentials of what the Church of England believed. John Henry Newman (one of the leading Tractarians in the mid 19th century), before he converted to Roman Catholicism, tried to show that the Articles could be seen in a way less hostile to Catholic belief.\nAcceptance of the Articles.\nOutside the Church of England, Anglican opinions of the Thirty-Nine Articles vary. The Episcopal Church in the United States of America sees them as an historical document but does not make its members follow them. Anglican priest John Wesley changed the Thirty-Nine Articles for use by American Methodists in the 18th century. These new Articles of Religion are still the official United Methodist Church doctrine."}
{"id": "44059", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44059", "title": "Teal", "text": "Teal can mean many things, such as:"}
{"id": "44062", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44062", "title": "Ojiya, Niigata", "text": "Ojiya (Japanese: \u5c0f\u5343\u8c37\uff08\u304a\u3062\u3084\uff09\u5e02;-shi) is a city in Niigata, Japan. As of July 16, 2003, 40,342 people lived in the city. Ojiya's total area is . The Lord Mayor of Ojiya is Yasuo Yatsui\nAn earthquake of magnitude 7.2 struck Ojiya on October 23, 2004 at 17:56 local time. The earthquake killed 51 people. 4,795 people were injured. 16,910 buildings and houses were destroyed. The amount of damage was 3,000,000,000 Yen ($32.5M US).\nEcomony.\nOjiya has many types of industry. Electronics companies Sanyo electric and Panasonic are located in the city. It also has textile companies. The main agricultural crop in the city is rice. Ojiya is the largest miner of natural gas in Japan.\nEvents.\nThere are several festival each year in Ojiya."}
{"id": "44063", "revid": "13", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44063", "title": "Ojiya city Japan", "text": ""}
{"id": "44064", "revid": "13", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44064", "title": "Ojiya", "text": ""}
{"id": "44067", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44067", "title": "Tantalus", "text": "Tantalus was a mortal king in Greek mythology. He did many bad things against the gods and goddesses. At a banquet, he tried to feed people the flesh of his son Pelops. He had asked the gods and goddesses to come to this banquet. When they learn what he had planned, they punished Tantalus in not only this world (the world of the living), but the next as well (the world of the dead). Tantalus's punishment while he was alive was the ruin of his kingdom. His punishment when dead in the Tartaros of the Underworld was much worse.\nHe was made to stand in a pool of water up to his chin for all time. During this, he would always be hungry and thirsty. Each time Tantalus lowered his head to drink the water he was standing in, the water would lower. Over his head hung branches of trees filled with fruit. When he would try to get them, wind would blow them out of his reach. He was \"tantalized\" with food and drink. This is where the word tantalize comes from.\nHis daughter is Niobe. And his son, Pelops, was made alive again by the gods. He went to Greece and became the ruler of the peninsula which still has his name, the Peloponesus."}
{"id": "44069", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44069", "title": "Bushido", "text": ", meaning \"Way of the Warrior\", is a Japanese code of conduct and a way of life, more or less similar to the European code of chivalry. It comes from the samurai moral code and gives great importance to certain virtues like frugality, loyalty, martial arts mastery and honour until voluntary death, seppuku. Bushid\u014d was created between the 11th to 14th centuries and took form as a code from the 12th to 16th centuries.\nUnder the Tokugawa Shogunate, Bushid\u014d became official Japanese Feudal Law.\nHonor codes are still used in modern times; for example, as part of the kamikaze beliefs... "}
{"id": "44090", "revid": "6692", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44090", "title": "39 articles", "text": ""}
{"id": "44091", "revid": "3366", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44091", "title": "Under", "text": ""}
{"id": "44092", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44092", "title": "Serpent", "text": ""}
{"id": "44095", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44095", "title": "Akbar", "text": ""}
{"id": "44102", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44102", "title": "Campaign", "text": "Campaign is trying to do something. Some battles in wars are called campaigns. The word comes from \"Campania\", a region where the ancient Roman army often fought.\nWhen someone in politics seeks election to a political office, that is called a \"political campaign\". Sometimes, a series of advertisements can be referred to as an \"advertising campaign\". A \"blood drive\", when the Red Cross or a hospital asks people to give blood, is also a campaign.\nA campaign usually involves groups of people following a plan and working together in different ways to get what they want."}
{"id": "44103", "revid": "7871234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44103", "title": "Manco C\u00e1pac", "text": "Manco C\u00e1pac (died in 1231) was the first of the fourteen Inca rulers of Peru. He started the Inca empire. \nAs he says it, his legend started at the waters of Lake Titicaca, when he was told by the sun god to go East to set up his empire. As they walked looking for a good place, Manco taught men to farm, hunt, and fish while Mama Ocllo, his wife taught women to work with wool and cotton. Near Cusco, as his sacred golden staff sank in the ground, Manco decided this was to be the capital city of his empire."}
{"id": "44106", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44106", "title": "Brazzaville", "text": "Brazzaville is the capital city of the Republic of the Congo. One million people live there.\nBrazzaville is on one side of the Congo river, with Kinshasa on the other side. Brazzaville and Kinshasa are the nearest country capitals in the World."}
{"id": "44107", "revid": "823563", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44107", "title": "Yellow Sea", "text": "The Yellow Sea is the northern part of the East China Sea. It is between Mainland China and the Korean peninsula. The northwestern part is called the Bohai Sea. The name \"Yellow Sea\" comes from the silt particles that color its water. The particles come from the Yellow River. Smaller rivers include the Yalu and Han Rivers. "}
{"id": "44113", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44113", "title": "East China Sea", "text": "The East China Sea is a marginal sea east of China. It is a part of the Pacific Ocean and covers an area of 1,249,000 km\u00b2. In China, the sea is called the \"East Sea\". In Korea, the sea is sometimes called \"South Sea\", but this is more often used to speak only of the area near South Korea's southern coast.\nGeography.\nThe East China Sea is bounded on the East by Ky\u016bsh\u016b and the Ry\u016bky\u016b Islands, on the South by Taiwan, and on the West by mainland China. It is connected with the South China Sea by the Taiwan Strait and with the Sea of Japan by the Korea Strait; it opens in the North to the Yellow Sea.\nTerritories with borders on the sea (clockwise from north) include: South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, and Mainland China.\nRivers.\nThe Yangtze River (Chang Jiang) is the largest river flowing into the East China Sea."}
{"id": "44116", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44116", "title": "Governor of California", "text": "The Governor of California is the highest office in the state government in the American state of California. The office of Governor of California was created in 1849, before California became a state. Before it was a state, there had been six American military governors and numerous Mexican governors when California was part of Mexico. The current Governor of California is Gavin Newsom.\nThe Governor is in charge of making yearly \"State of the State\" speeches to the California state government, submitting the budget, and making sure that state laws are being followed. \nSome well known former governors include Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jerry Brown, George Deukmejian, Pat Brown, and Ronald Reagan."}
{"id": "44117", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44117", "title": "Hymn", "text": "A hymn is a religious song of worship in Christianity, or a sacred song. Collections of hymns are known as hymnals.\nIn Hinduism, a hymn is a \"shloka\"."}
{"id": "44118", "revid": "5457", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44118", "title": "Hymm", "text": ""}
{"id": "44123", "revid": "625332", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44123", "title": "Scarlett O'Hara", "text": "Scarlett O'Hara is the main charcater in Margaret Mitchell's book \"Gone with the Wind\" with the movie adaptation, and \"Scarlett\" by Alexandra Ripley. She is one of the residents of Georgia who had histrionic personality disorder."}
{"id": "44124", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44124", "title": "Vivien Leigh", "text": "Vivien Leigh (; 5 November 1913 \u2013 8 July 1967; born Vivian Mary Hartley and styled as Lady Olivier after 1947) was an English actress. She is best known for playing Scarlett O'Hara in \"Gone with the Wind\" in 1939, and Blanche DuBois in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" in 1951. Leigh won Academy Awards for both of these roles.\nLeigh was born in Darjeeling, Bengal, British India. She was married to Laurence Olivier from 1940-1960 and often acted in plays and movies with him. Olivier was Leigh's second husband. The first was Leigh Holman, and Miss Leigh was still legally married to him when she came to the US to accompany Laurence Olivier who came to Hollywood to star in David O. Selznick's production of \"Rebecca\" directed by Alfred Hitchcock. It was lucky that Miss Leigh's agent just happened to be David O. Selznick's brother, Myron. Miss Leigh wrote long letters to her husband then during the shooting of GWTW, complaining about the script, the change of director from George Cukor to Victor Fleming. The change was made at the insistence of Clark Gable, who felt that Cukor was devoting too much time and attention to directing Miss Leigh and her co-star, Olivia de Havilland. Miss Leigh also complained in her letters of Gable's bad breath due to his dentures.\nWhen her divorce was final, she married Olivier (she referred to him as her husband until she died, although they had been divorced for many years). Leigh believed that Olivier was the best actor of his (or any) generation, and worked very hard to be worthy of acting with him - on stage, of course. Leigh believed, as did Olivier, that the only place \"real\" acting took place was on the stage. Her movie career reflects her lack of enthusiasm for that medium, concentrating instead on acting with Lord Olivier in live theatre. Many critics, however, did not feel that she had the \"presence\" and vocal prowess that Olivier possessed and her reviews were often (perhaps unfairly) negatively compared to her husband.\nLeigh was considered to be beautiful and this sometimes meant that she thought that she was not taken seriously as an actress. However her ill health was often a bigger problem. Leigh suffered from bipolar disorder and often had tuberculosis. These meant that her career went through period of decline and that she was sometimes considered difficult to work with. She died of tuberculosis in London."}
{"id": "44126", "revid": "890988", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44126", "title": "Sacred Heart", "text": "The prayer to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is a Roman Catholic devotion. A devotion is something that people do or say to show their love for God and Jesus. Saint Margaret Mary Alacoque wrote the prayer. When Roman Catholics pray to the Sacred Heart of Jesus they are praying for a part of Jesus that they believe is divine. The devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is also popular among some Anglo-Catholic Anglicans (Anglicans who use many of the same practices as Catholics).\nEarly devotion.\nEarly Christians, for example John the Evangelist and Paul of Tarsus, wrote the first devotions or prayers to the love of God. The earliest devotions to the \"Sacred Heart of Jesus\" were from the Benedictine or Cistercian monasteries. St. Bernard of Clairveaux from the Cistercian religious order was the first person to write a devotion to the \"Sacred Heart of Jesus\", but some people believe that the first person was St. Anselm.\nThe devotion of the \"Sacred Heart of Jesus\" started to be more popular between the 13th century and the 16th century. Some religious orders, for example the Franciscans, Dominicans, and Carthusians practised the devotion. But, the devotion of the \"Sacred Heart of Jesus\" was most common with individual Christians. For many the devotion was a mystical devotion - similar to an experience in mysticism.\nIn the sixteenth century, there was a change in the way people practised the devotion of the \"Sacred Heart of Jesus\". The devotion started to be part of Christian Asceticism and stopped being part of Christian Mysticism. In the sixteenth century, the devotion also started to use special written prayers and exercises. For example, the devotion used the writings of Lanspergius (d. 1539) of the Carthusians of Cologne and of Louis of Blois (Blosius; 1566), who was a Benedictine and Abbot of Liessies in Hainaut. The devotion also used or followed the writing of John of Avila (d. 1569) and St. Francis de Sales, who lived in the 17th century.\nIn the 17th century, writers who followed Christian Asceticism wrote about the devotion of the \"Sacred Heart of Christian Jesus\". For example, Ascetic writers from the Society of Jesus wrote about the devotion many times. The image of the Sacred Heart of Jesus became very common. It was popular because many people used the image in the Franciscan devotion to the \"Five Wounds\" (explanation needed). The image also became popular because many Jesuits - members of the Society of Jesus- put the image on the first page of their books and on the walls of their churches.\nBut, the devotion of the \"Sacred Heart of Jesus\" continued to be a private and mostly individual devotion. Jean Eudes (1602-1680) made it a public devotion, gave it a religious Office (needs explanation), and created a Feast for it. P\u00e8re Eudes was the apostle of the Heart of Mary; but in his devotion to the Immaculate Heart there was a share for the Heart of Jesus. Little by little, the devotion to the Sacred Heart became a separate one, and on August 31, 1670, the first feast of the Sacred Heart was celebrated in the Grand Seminary of Rennes. Coutances followed suit on October 20, a day with which the Eudist feast was from then on to be connected. The feast soon spread to other dioceses, and the devotion adopted in various religious communities. It gradually came into contact with the devotion begun at Paray, and resulting in a fusion of the two.\nVisions of St. Margaret Mary.\nThe most significant source for the devotion to the Sacred Heart in the form it is known today was a nun of the religious congregation of the Visitation of Mary Saint Margaret Mary Alacoque (1647-1690), who claimed to have received visions of Jesus Christ. There is nothing to indicate that she had known the devotion prior to the revelations, or at least that she had paid any attention to it. These alleged revelations were numerous, and the following apparitions are especially remarkable:\nOn December 27, probably 1673, the feast of St. John, Margaret Mary reported that Jesus permitted her, as he had formerly allowed St. Gertrude, to rest her head upon his heart. He then disclosed to her the wonders of his love, telling her that wanted them known to all mankind and to spread the treasures of his goodness, and that he had chosen her for this work.\nIn probably June or July, 1674, Margaret Mary claimed that Jesus requested to be honored under the figure of his heart of flesh, also claiming that, when he appeared radiant with love, he asked for a devotion of expiatory love: frequent reception of Communion, especially Communion on the First Friday of the month, and the observance of the Holy Hour.\nDuring the octave of Corpus Christi, 1675, probably on June 16, the vision known as the \"great apparition\" reportedly took place, where Jesus said, \"Behold the Heart that has so loved men ... instead of gratitude I receive from the greater part (of mankind) only ingratitude ...\", and asked Margaret Mary for a feast of reparation of the Friday after the octave of Corpus Christi, bidding her consult Father de la Colombi\u00e8re, then superior of the small Jesuit house at Paray. Solemn homage was asked on the part of the king, and the mission of propagating the new devotion was especially confided to the religious of the Visitation and to the priests of the Society of Jesus.\nA few days after the \"great apparition\", Margaret Mary reported everything she saw to Father de la Colombi\u00e8re, and he acknowledging the vision as an action of the spirit of God, consecrated himself to the Sacred Heart and directed her to write an account of the apparition. He also made use of every available opportunity to circulate this account, discreetly, through France and England.\nAt his death, February 15, 1682, there was found in his journal of spiritual retreats a copy in his own handwriting of the account that he had requested of Margaret Mary, together with a few reflections on the usefulness of the devotion. This journal, including the account and an \"offering\" to the Sacred Heart, in which the devotion was well explained, was published at Lyons in 1684. The little book was widely read, even at Paray.\nMargaret Mary reported feeling \"dreadful confusion\" over the book's contents, but resolved to make the best of it, approving of the book for the spreading of her cherished devotion. Outside of the Visitandines, priests, religious, and laymen espoused the devotion, particularly a Capuchin, Margaret Mary's two brothers, and some Jesuits, among the latter being Fathers Croiset and Gallifet, who promoted the devotion.\nThe death of Margaret Mary, October 17, 1690, did not dampen the zeal of those interested; on the contrary, a short account of her life published by Father Croiset in 1691, as an appendix to his book \"De la D\u00e9votion au Sacr\u00e9 C\u0153ur\", served only to increase it. In spite of all sorts of obstacles, and of the slowness of the Holy See, which in 1693 imparted indulgences to the Confraternities of the Sacred Heart and, in 1697, granted the feast to the Visitandines with the Mass of the Five Wounds, but refused a feast common to all, with special Mass and Office.\nThe devotion spread, particularly in religious communities. The Marseilles plague, 1720, furnished perhaps the first occasion for a solemn consecration and public worship outside of religious communities. Other cities of the South followed the example of Marseilles, and thus the devotion became a popular one. In 1726 it was deemed advisable once more to importune Rome for a feast with a Mass and Office of its own, but, in 1729, Rome again refused. However, in 1765, it finally yielded and that same year, at the request of the queen, the feast was received quasi-officially by the episcopate of France. On all sides it was asked for and obtained, and finally, in 1856, at the urgent entreaties of the French bishops, Pope Pius IX extended the feast to the Catholic Church under the rite of double major. In 1889 it was raised by the Catholic Church to the double rite of first class.\nOn May 15, 2006, Pope Benedict XVI sent a letter to FatherPeter Hans Kolvenbach, the Superior General of the Society of Jesus, on the 50th Anniversary of the encyclical \"Haurietis Aquas\", about the Sacred Heart, by Pope Pius XII. In the letter, the Pope reaffirmed the importance of the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus.\nWorship and devotion.\nThe Catholic acts of consecration, reparation and devotion were introduced when the feast of the Sacred Heart was declared. In his Papal Bull \"Auctorem Fidei\", Pope Pius VI praised devotion to the Sacred Heart. Finally, by order of Leo XIII, in his encyclical \"Annum Sacrum\" (May 25, 1899), as well as on June 11, he consecrated every human to the Sacred Heart. The idea of this act, which Leo XIII called \"the great act\" of his pontificate, had been proposed to him by a religious woman of the Good Shepherd from Oporto (Portugal) who said that she had supernaturally received it from Jesus. Since c. 1850, groups, congregations, and States have consecrated themselves to the Sacred Heart.\nPeter Coudrin of France founded the Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary on Dec 24, 1800. A religious order of the Roman Catholic Church, the order is best known for its missionary work in Hawaii.\nWorship of the Sacred Heart mainly consists of several hymns, the Salutation of the Sacred Heart, and the Litany of the Sacred Heart. It is common in Roman Catholic services and occasionally is to be found in Anglican services.\nThe Feast of the Sacred Heart is a holy day in the Roman Catholic liturgical calendar, and is celebrated 19 days after Pentecost. As Pentecost is always celebrated on Sunday, the Feast of the Sacred Heart always falls on a Friday.\nThe Enthronement of the Sacred Heart is a Catholic ceremony in which a priest or head of a household consecrates the members of the household to the Sacred Heart. A blessed image of the Sacred Heart, either a statue or a picture, is then \"enthroned\" in the home to serve as a constant reminder to those who dwell in the house of their consecration to the Sacred Heart. The practice of the Enthronement is based upon Pope Pius XII's declaration that devotion to the Sacred of Jesus is \"the foundation on which to build the kingdom of God in the hearts of individuals, families, and nations...\"[4]\nInstitution names.\nSacred Heart is still a widely used name for many Catholic institutions, including schools, colleges, and hospitals in many countries around the world. It is also the name of many Catholic parishes, religious orders, and stores selling Catholic goods.\nSacred Heart imagery.\nReligious imagery depicting the Sacred Heart is frequently featured in Catholic, and sometimes Anglican homes. Sometimes images display beneath them a list of family members, indicating that the entire family is entrusted to the protection of Jesus in the Sacred Heart, from whom blessings on the home and the family members are sought. The prayer \"O Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in Thee\" is often used. One particular image has been used as part of a set, along with an image of the Blessed Virgin Mary. In that image, Mary too was shown pointing to her Immaculate Heart, expressing her love for the human race and for her Son, Jesus Christ. The mirror images reflect an eternal binding of the two hearts.\nFolklore.\nMany members of the Carlist military forces of the 19th and 20th centuries in Spain wore detentes or amulets with an image of the Sacred Heart. These Catholic monarchists believed the image would protect them against wounding by the enemy firearms.\nCriticism.\nSome non-Catholics, including Charismatic Protestants, have criticized devotion to the Sacred Heart as idolatry in that worship is directed towards a body part. The response of Catholics is to contend that the Sacred Heart is a traditional symbol depicting Christ's holy blood as a fountain. Some Catholics have been critical of the overly sentimental nature of such devotion,[5] but most of these critics concede that the images essentially reflect the core Christian tenet of love.\nVatican endorsement.\nDates for the Feast of the Sacred Heart, 2002-2020"}
{"id": "44127", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44127", "title": "Sacred heart of jesus", "text": ""}
{"id": "44128", "revid": "1068258", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44128", "title": "Marian Prayer", "text": "Marian prayers or Marian devotions are acts of asking for the intercession of the Mary, the mother of Jesus. It is mainly something done by Roman Catholics but it is also used by Anglo-Catholics. Marian prayer is not worship. It is asking Mary to pray, or intercede for you and/or other people. When asking for Mary's intercession, you are honouring her and not worshipping her. It is to ask her to help you communicate better with her son, Jesus. They do believe she was created perfect, or without sin. They \"are\" still following the second commandment, because they are not worshipping, only asking for intercession in their lives. Many novenas and prayers can be said in her honour. \nThere are in fact many common ways in doing so but there is a simplistic yet symbolical prayer called the rosary, the reciting pray for the intervening of mother Mary. This is said in honour and praise of her as well as to ask of her help. Another example is yet commonly said during the rosary itself and is called the \"hail holy queen\". "}
{"id": "44129", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44129", "title": "Clark Gable", "text": "William Clark Gable (February 1, 1901 \u2013 November 16, 1960) was an American actor. He is best known for playing the part of Rhett Butler in the 1939 movie version of \"Gone with the Wind\". Gable won an Academy Award for playing Fletcher Christian in the 1935 movie version of \"Mutiny on the Bounty\". He also starred in \"It Happened One Night\" with Claudette Colbert and \"Mogambo\" with Grace Kelly and Ava Gardner.\nGable was born on February 1, 1901 in Cadiz, Ohio. He was married five times. He had two children. The last movie that Gable starred in was \"The Misfits\", in 1961. This movie also starred Marilyn Monroe and was written by Arthur Miller. Gable died shortly afterwards in Los Angeles, California, after having had a fourth coronary thrombosis."}
{"id": "44130", "revid": "6669875", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44130", "title": "Nyctosaurus", "text": "Nyctosaurus was a pterosaur from the Upper Cretaceous. It had a wing span of 1 meter and a very big crest. It was in the Pterodactyloidea and related to \"Pteranodon\". "}
{"id": "44131", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44131", "title": "Marilyn Monroe", "text": "Marilyn Monroe\u00a0(born\u00a0Norma Jeane Mortenson; June 1, 1926\u00a0\u2013 August 4, 1962) was an American actress, writer, model, singer and filmmaker. Between 1946 and 1962, she made 44 movies. Famous for playing comic \"blonde bombshell\" characters,\u00a0she became one of the most popular\u00a0sex symbols\u00a0of the 1950s and was emblematic of the era's attitudes towards sexuality. Although she was a\u00a0top-billed actress for only a decade, her films grossed $200 million by the time of\u00a0her unexpected death\u00a0in 1962.\nBiography.\nMarilyn Monroe was born as Norma Jeane Mortenson or Norma Jeane Baker, on June 1, 1926 at LAC+USC Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, United States. When she was seven years old, her mother, Gladys (Monroe) Baker Mortenson, was hospitalized after being diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic, a severe mental condition. Norma was left in a series of foster homes and the Los Angeles Orphans' Home Society. The constant move from one foster home to another resulted in Norma's \"sketchy\" educational background.\nAfter Norma's sixteenth birthday, her foster parents had to move from California. To avoid an orphanage or a new foster home, Norma chose to get married. On June 19, 1942, Norma married James Dougherty, but the marriage would all but end when he joined the U.S. Merchant Marines in 1943. Though her difficult childhood and early failed marriage would make Norma Jean a strong and resilient woman, these experiences would also add to her insecurities and flaws\u2014things that would ultimately shape her into a great tragic figure of the twentieth\u00a0century.\nMovies.\nMarilyn Monroe became famous, starring in a number of hit movies during the 1950s and early 1960s. She also became famous for modeling for photographers and singing in her musical movies. One time, she sang \"Happy Birthday\" to President John F. Kennedy. It turned out to be one of her last appearances.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages.\nThe 16-year-old Norma Jeane married James Dougherty on June 19, 1942. After the wedding, he joined the navy. At this time, Norma met an army photographer, David Conover. She began a career as a model. She changed her name to Marilyn Monroe. She and Dougherty divorced on September 13, 1946.\nMonroe married the baseball star Joe DiMaggio on January 14, 1954. The marriage lasted for nine months. She had met DiMaggio on a blind date, during the filming of the movie \"Monkey Business\" in 1952. The marriage was closely followed by the public. DiMaggio retired from baseball, and Marilyn became very famous. DiMaggio was sad that his career as a baseball star was ending, and was jealous of Marilyn for being admired. He spent most of his time watching television and Monroe found it boring. They separated on October 31, 1954. From 1961, they became friends again. DiMaggio said that he gave Marilyn a rose every week for 10 years.\nMarilyn married Arthur Miller on June 29, 1956. She converted to Judaism. She had met him during the filming of \"As Young As You Feel\" in 1951. She was so happy with him and they tried to have children together. Marilyn had three miscarriages, because of her endometriosis. Miller wrote the screenplay for the movie \"The Misfits\". The filming caused many problems between Marilyn and Arthur and they separated on January 20, 1961.\nDeath.\nShe died early from an overdose of barbiturates on August 4, 1962 in Brentwood, Los Angeles, California, U.S. at 36 years old."}
{"id": "44133", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44133", "title": "Eliot, Maine", "text": "Eliot is an American town in the state of Maine. The population was 5,954 at the 2000 census.\nThe schools in Eliot are a part of MSAD35. It is around an hour away from Boston."}
{"id": "44134", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44134", "title": "The Fellowship of Saint John", "text": ""}
{"id": "44138", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44138", "title": "Troodon", "text": "Troodon (or Tro\u00f6don) is an genus of relatively small, bird-like dinosaurs, from the later part of the Cretaceous period, 75\u201365 million years ago. The alternate spelling \"Tro\u00f6don\" shows that the 'o's are pronounced separately, as in 'zoology'.\nThey were probably carnivorous, but details of their teeth are a bit unusual. Some experts suggest they may have included plant material in their diet, but this is not a majority view.\nDiscovered in central Montana in 1855, it was among the first dinosaurs found in North America. Its species ranged widely, with fossil remains recovered from as far north as Alaska, and the Judith River formation of Alberta, and as far south as Wyoming and even possibly Texas and New Mexico.\n\"Troodon\" had a large brain in proportion to its body weight. It had a sickle claw, an enlarged and retractable second toe claw bone. \"Troodon\" had 122 teeth. The size and shape of the leg bones show that the \"Troodon\" would have been a fast runner. \nThe view that \"Troodon\" was a predator is supported by its sickle claw on the foot and apparently good binocular vision.\n\"Troodon\"s size ranged widely. In general, individuals that lived further north were larger than those that lived in more southern areas. \"Troodons\" in Alaska were especially large, up to 12 feet long, 5 feet tall, and weighing up to 175 pounds. Meanwhile, \"Troodons\" that lived in more southern locations were only around 7 feet long, 3 feet tall, and weighed up to 50 pounds, about the size of a \"Velociraptor\". Very likely \"Troodon\" had feathers, but no fossil evidence for feathers has yet been found.\nThere has been a lot of debate about which specimens, all very incomplete, should be called \"Troodon\". The genus now includes specimens previously classified as \"Stenonychosaurus\".\n\"Troodon\" nests full of eggs have been found in Montana. When scientists CAT-scanned them, they found baby Troodon skeleton embryos inside of them. They found skeletons of a small plant-eating dinosaur named \"Orodromeus\" with the eggs, as well as a skeleton of an adult Troodon. At first, it was believed that the eggs had belonged to the \"Orodromeus\", and that the Troodon was there intending to rob the nest.\nHowever, it was later discovered that the eggs belonged to the \"Troodon\" when baby \"Troodon\" embryos were found inside the eggs. It is now believed that the adults had killed the \"Orodromeus\" and brought them back to feed their babies. \"Troodon\"s laid up to 24 eggs in their nests which were earth mounds. They were able to lay two eggs at a time, so large clutches would take two weeks to lay.\nA 2017 description had redeemed the validity of \"Stenonychosaurus\" and had created a new genus from separate bones naming them \"Lateniventrix\", limiting \"Troodon\" to a few teeth. "}
{"id": "44139", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44139", "title": "Saurornithoides", "text": "Saurornithoides was a fast running dinosaur from 79 million years ago. It was related to \"Troodon\". Its fossils have been found in Mongolia and China. \nLike its cousin \"Troodon\", \"Saurornithoides\" was an intelligent predator, with large eyes and good vision. It had a retractable, sickle-shaped claw on the second claw of each foot that was used for attacking prey. \"Saurornithoides\" probably fed on small prey, such as lizards, frogs, insects, and small mammals. It may also have hunted in packs to bring down other dinosaurs. \"Saurornithoides\" was discovered in the Gobi Desert on an expedition in the 1920s. The dinosaurs \"Velociraptor\", \"Protoceratops\", and \"Oviraptor\" were also discovered during these expeditions to the Gobi Desert."}
{"id": "44146", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44146", "title": "Reining", "text": "Reining is a competitive way of riding a horse. In reining, the horse performs spins, sliding stops, rollbacks and lead changes. Reining has twelve patterns the rider normally has to follow. The rider can perform freestyle where they make up their own pattern and ride it to music. This is all done under a western saddle.\nHistory of the sport.\nHorses have been used by humans for thousands of years, and the skills associated with riding horses have been gradually developed throughout this history. The skills used today in reining originate from tasks done with work horses like to gather cattle together.\nWhat is reining.\nIn competition, the riders need to do many manoeuvres at a gallop. They need to guide precisely the horses with one hand through a complex pattern that includes stops, spins, rollbacks and circles. There are twelve different patterns. The rider and the horse are judged on various criteria. First, points can be given or removed for the obedience of the horse if it seemed easy and fluid for the rider to control him or if the horse showed some resistance. The show is also judged for the execution of the manoeuvres and the control of the rider. For example, if the manoeuvre was executed correctly no point are given and no point are removed, if the manoeuvre was executed badly the judge decides on how many points he removes and if the manoeuvre was executed I an excellent way, the judge can give points. The rider executing is pattern and the judge evaluating it takes about five minutes and after that, the judge gives mark on a total of seventy points for the execution of the choreography by the rider and the horse."}
{"id": "44148", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44148", "title": "Eliot Maine", "text": ""}
{"id": "44156", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44156", "title": "Dalton's Atomic Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "44159", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44159", "title": "Rani Lakshmibai", "text": "Lakshmana, the Rani of Jhansi (19 November 1828 \u2014 18 June 1858) was an Indian queen and warrior.\nShe was one of the greatest leaders of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and, became for Indian nationalists a symbol of resistance to British rule in India.\nLife.\nManikarnika was born into a Maratha family. She was married to Raja Gangadhar Rao, the Maharaja of Jhansi, in 1842, and became the Rani of Jhansi. After her marriage, Manikarnika became Lakshmibai, named in honour of the goddess Lakshmi. Before her marriage, she was known as Chabili (meaning \"jolly ways\"). In September 1851, Rani Lakshmibai had a son, Damodar Rao. He died at the age of four months. On the day before the Raja's death in November 1853, he adopted his cousin's child. His name was Anand Rao but, was renamed Damodar Rao, after their actual son. The Raja wrote a letter to the British government of India requesting that his widow should be recognised as the ruler of Jhansi after his death during her lifetime. After the death of her husband the head of the British government refused to allow her adopted son to become raja and Jhansi was ruled by the British. This was done by the \"Doctrine of lapse\" - if an Indian ruler died without a male child his adopted son would not succeed him; but the personal property of that king goes to his adopted son.\nAfter all the British in Jhansi had been killed by Indian troops in June 1857 the Rani took over the administration provisionally until the British returned. She had to form an army to defeat the invading forces of Orchha and Datia. In March 1858, British forces led by Sir Hugh Rose came to Jhansi to take back the city from the Rani who now wanted independence. Jhansi was besieged and taken after strong resistance. Many of the people of the city were killed in the fighting and afterwards. The Rani escaped to Kalpi and jointly with the Maratha general Tantya Tope then seized Gwalior. In the battle of Kotah ki Serai in which their army was defeated Rani Lakshmibai was wounded and died on 18th June 1858."}
{"id": "44160", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44160", "title": "Ukrainian hryvnia", "text": "Hryvnia is the national currency of Ukraine."}
{"id": "44162", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44162", "title": "Hryvnia", "text": ""}
{"id": "44163", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44163", "title": "Ukrainian Hryvnia", "text": ""}
{"id": "44165", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44165", "title": "Chronos", "text": "Chronos (Ancient Greek: , \"time\", also written as Khronos or Chronus) is the Greek God of time. He is the personification of time in philosophy before Socrates, and in later literature. Chronos controls the past, present, and future of everything. Without Chronos, the other Greek Gods would have never existed.\nIn the Orphic cosmogony, Chronos never ages. He gives birth to Aether and Chaos, and made a silvery egg in the divine Aether. It produced the god Phanes, who is a hermaphrodite. Phanes gave birth to the first generation of gods and is the creator of the cosmos."}
{"id": "44173", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44173", "title": "Speyer", "text": "Speyer (English formerly \"Spires\") is a city in the state of Rhineland-Palatinate with about 50,000 inhabitants on the Rhine river. It lies south of Ludwigshafen and Mannheim. Around the year 500 the town gets the name \"Spira\", named after the stream \"Speyerbach\" which flows into the Rhine river here.\nThe center of Speyer is dominated by the cathedral. Here are the tombs of several of the Salian emperors: the bodies, however, are believed to have gone missing during one of the French invasions during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. "}
{"id": "44186", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44186", "title": "Armand Jean du Plessis", "text": ""}
{"id": "44192", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44192", "title": "Goethe University Frankfurt", "text": "The Goethe University Frankfurt (German: \"Goethe-Universit\u00e4t Frankfurt am Main\") opened in 1914. With 38.000 students it belongs to the five largest universities in Germany and has the biggest library of them. The university has more than 600 teaching and researching professors; 16 faculties offer 170 courses of study."}
{"id": "44193", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44193", "title": "Thayer Academy", "text": "Thayer Academy is a private school that prepares people for college. It is in Braintree, Massachusetts. People from Grades 6\u201312 can become students there. The school was made in 1871, at the request of General Sylvanus Thayer. Thayer Academy is one of Greater Boston's most well respected private school's."}
{"id": "44194", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44194", "title": "Siegfried", "text": "Sigurd (Old Norse: Sigur\u00f0r) is a strong hero in the \"Nibelungenlied\", a epic poem written about the year 1200. He killed the dragon Fafnir and took its treasure, the \"Nibelungenschatz\". After killing the dragon, he bathed in its blood and so changed his skin, so that he could not be wounded any more. The earliest extant representations for his legend come in pictorial form from seven runestones in Sweden and most notably the Ramsund carving (c. 1000) and the G\u00f6k Runestone (11th century).\nBut a leaf fell from a linden tree above while he was bathing and landed on his back, and the little patch of skin that it covered did not touch the dragon's blood, so that Siegfried remained vulnerable (he could be hurt) in that one spot.\nSiegfried wants to marry Kriemhild, the sister of Gunther, kin of the Burgundians in Worms. But before he is allowed to marry her he has to help Gunther to win against Br\u00fcnhild, the queen of Iceland. He does it with the help of a cloak which lets him become invisible.\nAfter their marriage Siegfried and Kriemhild live in Siegfried's kingdom for some years. Then they come to visit Worms and Kriemhild's family again. Br\u00fcnhild, the wife of Gunther, and\nKriemhild argue about who is of higher rank. Now Kriemhild tells Br\u00fcnhild that Siegfried helped Gunther in his fight against her and that he gave a proof of this victory to Kriemhild. Therefore, Br\u00fcnhild becomes so furious that she decides that Siegfried must be killed. This is done by Hagen, one of Gunther's men, while Siegfried is drinking from a well during a hunt in the Odenwald. Hagen also takes the treasure of Siegfried from Kriemhild and throws it into the Rhine.\nThe name Siegfried in German means \"victory peace\".\nSiegfried appears in two of the four operas in Wagner's Ring cycle: the third opera is called \"Siegfried\" and the fourth one is called \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" although originally Wagner called it \"Siegfrieds Tod\" (\"The Death of Siegfried\"). Wagner makes several changes to the story."}
{"id": "44195", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44195", "title": "James II of England", "text": "James II and VII (14 October 1633 \u2013 16 September 1701) was king of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1685 to 1688. He was King James II in England and Ireland, and King James VII in Scotland. He was also Duke of Normandy from 31 December 1660. He lost his kingdoms in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. He did not succeed in taking them back in a war, and he spent the rest of his life in France.\nHe was the last Roman Catholic king in the British Isles. Some of his people did not like his religious ideas, leading a group of them to disobey and fight against him. This was called the Glorious Revolution in England and Scotland. King James and his son, James Francis Edward went into exile. The king was replaced by his Protestant daughter, Queen Mary II, and her husband King William III and II. They became rulers in 1689. \nThe belief that James, not William III or Mary II, was the one true ruler became known as Jacobitism (from Jacobus or Iacobus, Latin for James). James made one serious attempt to recover his throne when he landed in Ireland in 1689. After his defeat at the Battle of the Boyne in the summer of 1690, he returned to France, living the rest of his life under the protection of King Louis XIV. His son James Francis Edward Stuart (The Old Pretender) and his grandson Charles Edward Stuart (The Young Pretender and Bonnie Prince Charlie) attempted to restore the Jacobite line after James's death, but failed."}
{"id": "44196", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44196", "title": "Fichtelgebirge", "text": "The Fichtelgebirge is a mountain range in northeastern Bavaria, Germany. It extends from the valley of the Red Main River to the Czech border, where it is continued by the much higher Ore Mountains.\nThe highest mountain is the Schneeberg (1051 m). Rivers rising from the Fichtelgebirge are the White Main (German: Wei\u00dfer Main), the Saxon Saale, the Oh\u0159e (German: Eger) and the Fichtelnaab which later joins the Waldnaab. Cities on the edge of the mountains include Bayreuth and Hof.\nThe mountains slope gradually away to the north and the south, but there is a steep slope to the west, where the Red Main forms the boundary of the mountains.\nThe Fichtelgebirge attracts many tourists both during summer and winter, mainly for hiking and skiing, but also to see the large rock formations."}
{"id": "44201", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44201", "title": "Ore Mountains", "text": "The Ore Mountains (German \"Erzgebirge\", Czech \"Kru\u0161n\u00e9 hory\") are a mountain range in Germany and the Czech Republic. They form the border between both countries for 150\u00a0km, extending from the western border of Saxony to the Elbe river. They are named for their plentiful metal ores.\nThe Ore Mountains are famous for many Christmas traditions. As the ores silver and tin were not found any more in the mines, former miners had to look for new ways to feed their families. In addition to lace making and weaving, the inhabitants went into wood carving. Nutcrackers, \"smoking men\", \"pyramids\" (carousels with figures of the Christmas story or from mining) and \"Schwibbogen\" (wooden arcs with candles in the windows, symbolising the opening of a mine) are some of many Christmas goods made in the Ore Mountains. \"Seiffen\" in the East Ore Mountains was a centre of the wooden toy industry."}
{"id": "44202", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44202", "title": "Manifest (transportation)", "text": "A manifest or ship's manifest is a document that lists the cargo, passengers, and crew of a ship, aircraft, or vehicle. It is made for the use of customs and other officials. If the list is just a list of passengers, it is a passenger manifest or passenger list. A list of cargo is a cargo manifest or cargo list. The manifest may be used by people having in interest in the transport to insure that passengers and cargo listed as having been placed on board the transport at the beginning of its passage continue to be on board when it arrives at its destination."}
{"id": "44207", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44207", "title": "Stenonychosaurus", "text": "Stenonychosaurus (meaning \"narrow claw lizard\") is a genus of troodontid dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous of Alberta, Canada based on a foot, fragments of a hand, and some caudal vertebrae.\nA 2017 description had redeemed the validity of \"Stenonychosaurus\" and had informalised the genus \"Troodon\", synonymising it with \"Latenivenatrix\".\nDescription.\n\"Stenonychosaurus\" was a small dinosaur, up to in height, in length, and up to in mass.They, like most related dromaeosaurs such as \"Velociraptor\" and \"Deinonychus\" had retractable sickle-like claws on their feet."}
{"id": "44208", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44208", "title": "Henry IV of England", "text": " \nHenry IV (April 3 1367 \u2013 March 20 1413) was a King of England. He was born at Bolingbroke Castle in Lincolnshire, which is why he was often called \"Henry Bolingbroke\".\nRise to power.\nHis father, John of Gaunt, was the third son of King Edward III, and had a lot of power in the reign of King Richard II.\nHenry and Thomas de Mowbray, 1st Duke of Norfolk argued in 1398. King Richard ordered Henry to live outside England for ten years (with the approval of Henry's father, John of Gaunt) but Thomas de Mowbray was exiled from England for life.\nThe next year John of Gaunt died, and Richard would not allow Henry to inherit Gaunt's land. Instead, Henry had to ask for the lands from Richard. \nHenry met with the exiled Thomas Arundel, former Archbishop of Canterbury. Henry and Arundel returned to England while Richard was on a military campaign in Ireland. \nWith Arundel as his advisor, Henry Bolingbroke began a military campaign, took land from those who opposed him and ordering his soldiers to destroy much of Cheshire.\nHenry gained enough power and support to have himself declared King Henry IV. He sent King Richard to prison (who mysteriously died in prison) and by-passing Richard\u2019s seven-year-old heir presumptive Edmund de Mortimer. \nHenry was crowned on 13 October 1399. It was the first time since the Norman Conquest in 1066 that the monarch made a public speech in English. Henry consulted with Parliament frequently, but was sometimes at odds with them, especially over religious matters. On Arundel's advice, Henry was the first English king to allow the burning of heretics, mainly to suppress the Lollard movement."}
{"id": "44210", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44210", "title": "Thalassodromeus", "text": "Thalassodromeus was a pterosaur found in northern Brazil. It was 60 cms long and had a wingspan of 1 metre and a head crest on its skull."}
{"id": "44211", "revid": "43555", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44211", "title": "Oratorio", "text": "An oratorio is a piece of music for orchestra, choir and solo singers. It usually tells a story from the Old Testament. An oratorio may be about two hours long: a whole concert. It is rather like an opera, but whereas an opera is acted out in costume on a stage, an oratorio is sung and played in a concert hall or church. The oratorio as we know it was created in the 18th century. The words were normally in the composer\u2019s own language, not in Italian like most operas were at that time.\nThe word \"oratorio\" had been used many centuries ago for music-dramas performed in churches in western Europe. In Italy oratorios and operas were both being composed in the 17th century. In Germany composers like Heinrich Schutz and, later, Johann Sebastian Bach were writing Passions which tell the story of the crucifixion. These are not usually called \u201coratorios\u201d but they are similar.\nThe first important composer of oratorios was George Frideric Handel. Handel, who was born in Germany, had become English. Handel had written a lot of operas, but in 1732 he started to write oratorios instead and quite suddenly people became very interested in oratorios. He used the same sort of music as in his operas: the work would start with an overture (an introduction on the orchestra) and then there would be recitative (the bits that told the story), arias (songs for the solo singers) and choruses for the choir. The chorus was very important in oratorios: they got more to sing than in most operas. This meant that choral societies became very popular, and this tradition spread from England (where Handel lived) to other countries in Europe. Handel\u2019s most famous oratorio is \"Messiah\". Unlike most of his other oratorios, the story is not from the Old Testament. It tells the story of the birth, life and death of Jesus. In Britain Handel\u2019s \"Messiah\" is traditionally performed around Christmas. Other oratorios by Handel include: \"Deborah\", \"Saul\", \"Samson\", \"Judas Maccabaeus\" and \"Solomon\". Handel composed all these oratorios to English texts.\nIn the 19th century the oratorio was very popular. At the turn of the century Joseph Haydn wrote some of his best music in his two oratorios: \"Die Sch\u00f6pfung\" (\"The Creation\") (1798) and \"Die Jahreszeiten\" (\"The Seasons\") (1801). Mendelssohn wrote \"St Paul\", \"Elijah\" and the \"Hymn of Praise\". Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, Berlioz and Gounod are among the most important Romantic composers of oratorio, and in the 20th century famous oratorios include Elgar\u2019s \"Dream of Gerontius\" (1900), Walton\u2019s \"Belshazzar\u2019s Feast\" (1931) and Tippett\u2019s \"Child of our Time\" (1941)."}
{"id": "44213", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44213", "title": "Pterodactylus", "text": "Pterodactylus was a small pterosaur or flying reptile. It lived in the later Jurassic period, at the same time as many dinosaurs. \"Pterodactylus\" is typical of the short-tailed pterosaurs, a sub-order which continued to the end of the Cretaceous. \nThe first specimens were found at Solnhofen in Bavaria, Germany. Also found in these strata was the famous \"Archaeopteryx\". \nThese carbonate strata formed in warm lagoons. \"Pterodactylus\" may have lived on small islands in the lagoon, or on the coast. More likely, it lived further inland and was blown here in a storm. The high salinity would support little life, so the pterosaurs would have fed in some other area."}
{"id": "44217", "revid": "4781075", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44217", "title": "Rutiodon", "text": "Rutiodon was a type of phytosaur. Phytosaurs were crocodile-like animals that lived during the time of dinosaurs. Its nostrils were far back on the head, close to the eyes. It was shown in the movie \"When Dinosaurs Roamed America\" trying to catch a Coelophysis. It jumped out of the water. and roared without warning."}
{"id": "44234", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44234", "title": "When Dinosaurs Roamed America", "text": "When Dinosaurs Roamed America is a 2001 television movie from the Discovery Channel. The movie is narrated by John Goodman. This movie tells us about species of dinosaurs that lived in North America through the ages of the Mesozoic era. The backgrounds of the movie are real places of America.\nFeatured creatures.\nEarly Jurassic Segment.\nLate Jurassic Segment"}
{"id": "44236", "revid": "452346", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44236", "title": "Cigar", "text": "A cigar is a form in which tobacco is smoked. It is usually larger than a cigarette. Cigars are made of different types of tobacco which are cured in many different way to produce unique flavors and fragrances. Most quality cigars are rolled using a tobacco leaf, though more and more cigars have been rolled using different types of paper to replace the tobacco leaf. This results in a cleaner looking cigar. Commercially produced cigars are rolled and packed using machinery, and quality control and smokeability cannot be truly verified. Hand rolled cigars prove to still be the best option, but are more costly. \nCuba is known worldwide for their cigars. Many other countries also produce cigars, most notably in the Central America and Caribbean island areas."}
{"id": "44238", "revid": "1122328", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44238", "title": "Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h", "text": "Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, also spelled Bahaullah, which means \"Glory of God\", was a Persian nobleman who founded the religion known as the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith. \nHe was born in the city of Tehran, in Persia, in 1817. \nHis followers consider him a messenger of God."}
{"id": "44239", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44239", "title": "`Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1", "text": "`Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 was a Persian man who was born on May 23, 1844 and died on November 28, 1921. His father was Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h who founded the religion known as the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith. \n`Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 spent most of his adult life in prison or under arrest, because of his father's new religion. Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h called him the \"Expounder\" of his word, meaning that only `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 had the right to say what Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h's writings mean. This was to prevent different people from splitting the religion up because they thought Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h meant different things, the way many other religions have split up."}
{"id": "44240", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44240", "title": "Shoghi Effendi", "text": "Shoghi Effendi (1 March 1897-4 November 1957) was a Persian man. He was the great-grandson of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h who founded the religion known as the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith. \nAfter Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h died, Shoghi Effendi's grandfather, `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 lead the Bah\u00e1'\u00eds. `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 died, he left a \"will and testament\" that said that Shoghi Effendi was the \"Guardian\", and that his job was to guard and lead the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith. `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1's will said that only Shoghi Effendi could interpret `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1's or Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h's books and letters. This was to prevent different people from splitting the religion up because they thought Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h or `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 meant different things, the way many other religions have split up."}
{"id": "44241", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44241", "title": "Will (law)", "text": "A will or testament is a legal document that explains the last wishes of someone after they die. It is sometimes called a \"last will and testament\".\nA person writes a will and testament before they die, and usually writes what they want to happen to their estate (money and their things) after they die. A will may also provide for other issues including,\nWhen a person passes away, the person's will may be probated, meaning that a probate court will authorize a representative to carry out the deceased person's wishes. Depending upon where probate occurs, the representative may be called a \"personal representative\", \"executor\" or \"administrator\"."}
{"id": "44243", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44243", "title": "Interpretation", "text": ""}
{"id": "44246", "revid": "3164", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44246", "title": "How to name numbers in English", "text": ""}
{"id": "44247", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44247", "title": "Uhlan", "text": "Uhlan is the name for a type of Polish soldier of light cavalry, armed with lance (a kind of spear). The respect for such Polish troops caused that in the beginning of the 19th century great part of European armies created similar military units. In most European armies, the units of that kind took the name of lancers. In the Russian, Austrian, and German armies, the units of Polish lancers had kept the original name of Uhlans."}
{"id": "44253", "revid": "396686", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44253", "title": "Not", "text": "The word not negates the meaning of the word or phrase following it; see No.\nNot, NOT, NOTs, or NOTS may also refer to:"}
{"id": "44255", "revid": "7733499", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44255", "title": "Chin", "text": "The chin is the bottom part of the face. It is under the mouth and is the forward part of the jaw.\nThe chin is unique to present-day humans, our species. It is not present in the anthropoid apes, nor in any other hominin. Neanderthals did not have a human-type chin. In medical anatomy, the chin is called the \"mental eminence\".\nIts absence in \"Homo floresiensis\" is grounds for thinking that small hominin was not of our species.\nIt is thought that our chin may have become shaped like this to improve the muscle attachments of the lips and tongue. Chins can be larger or smaller, depending on the person. Even though chin sizes vary a lot, it is usually further forward than the rest of the face in normal humans."}
{"id": "44259", "revid": "766335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44259", "title": "Anne, Queen of Great Britain", "text": "Anne of Great Britain (6 February 1665 \u2013 1 August 1714) became Queen of England, Scotland, and Ireland on 8 March 1702. On 1 May 1707, when England and Scotland combined into a single kingdom, Anne became the first sovereign of the United Kingdom of Great Britain."}
{"id": "44260", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44260", "title": "Kind", "text": "Kind has different meanings:"}
{"id": "44261", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44261", "title": "Knot", "text": "A knot is a fixed looping of a piece of string or rope. Knots are often used for binding things together. While a knot is often made from rope, it can also be made from many other things. In fact, a knot is actually the condition a long flexible object is in. For example, hair can be tied in a knot. The ends of balloons are tied in a knot to prevent the air from escaping. The average person over 5 or so years of age is likely capable of tying a knot; most of these knots people tie are probably with their shoelaces. Ribbons are also tied in a knot so as to appear pretty, as when wrapped around a gift. In addition, knots are also made by sailors in many different forms and for many different purposes. There are even people who have adopted knot-making as a hobby."}
{"id": "44263", "revid": "1068258", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44263", "title": "Flensburg", "text": "Flensburg (Danish and Low Saxon: \"Flensborg\", Frisian: \"Flensburch\", North Frisian: \"Flansborj\") is a city in Germany, next to the border to Denmark. There are about 90,164 people living in Flensburg. The city has a university. A very well known part of Flensburg is M\u00fcrwik. There lies a small navy harbour. Flensburg lives on tourism, students and the German navy forces.\nHistory.\nThere was a first settlement about 1200 A.D., which became a city in 1284. In the following century, Flensburg became the economic centre of the Duchy of Schleswig. In 1409 there were battles between people of the Duchy of Holstein and the Danish crown about the control of Schleswig. In 1412 and 1500 there were bad plagues in Flensburg. In 1485, there was a big fire in the city.\nBetween 1460 and 1864 Flensburg was the second most important harbour in Denmark after Copenhagen. Since the 16th century Flensburg was an important place for trade. Flensburg became part of Prussia in 1864, after the Danish-Prussian War.\nIn 1920, there was an election in Schleswig. The vote was to decide whether people wanted to belong to Denmark or Germany. Flensburg and regions south of the city decided to stay German, while regions north of the city chose to become Danish.\nIn 1945, many Germans were driven out of their homes in the eastern German provinces. These people went to Flensburg. The city had more than 100,000 inhabitants for a couple of years. Nowadays Flensburg has about 85,000 inhabitants."}
{"id": "44267", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44267", "title": "Goslar", "text": "Goslar is a historic city in Germany. It has about 43,000 inhabitants.\nHistory.\nThe German Emperor Henry I founded Goslar in 922. In the 11th century Goslar became seat of a Pfalz, a temporary seat of the Emperor. In 1253 Goslar became a Free City (that means without being ruled a Duke) in the Holy Roman Empire and joined the Hanseatic League.\nHenry 4th a Holy Roman Emperor came from Goslar.\nIn the Thirty-year War Goslar belonged to the loyalists of the Emperor, although its territory belonged to a Protestant region. The Swedish King Gustav II Adolph punished Goslar for supporting the imperial forces. After 1642 Goslar came under the rule of the Welfs.\nIn 1803 Goslar lost its status as a Free City and belonged to Prussia. Napoleon made Goslar a part of the Kingdom of Westphalia. After the Napoleonic Wars it became part of the Kingdom of Hanover.\nIn the 19th century Goslar lost its economic base. Now it lives mainly on tourism."}
{"id": "44281", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44281", "title": "Spiderman", "text": ""}
{"id": "44282", "revid": "51072", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44282", "title": "Margaret Whitman", "text": ""}
{"id": "44288", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44288", "title": "Anonymous (group)", "text": "Anonymous is a group of anonymous online activists. They are associated with many online and offline protests. These protests commonly relate to freedom of speech. They often protest against political corruption and censorship. Anonymous also makes DDoS attacks (where an attacker disconnects his or her target from the internet, sometimes forever) on popular websites such as PayPal and the United States' Department of Justice homepage. Other common targets include organizations who seem to limit people's freedom of speech.\nAnonymous is also often associated with image boards such as 4chan and protests such as the Occupy Movement.\nSome people have been arrested for involvement in Anonymous cyberattacks in countries including the U.S., UK, Australia, the Netherlands, Spain, and Turkey. Views of the group's actions and usefulness vary widely. Supporters have called the group \"freedom fighters\" and digital Robin Hoods while some have judged them as \"a cyber lynch-mob\" or \"cyber terrorists\". In 2012, \"Time\" called Anonymous one of the \"100 most influential people\" of 2012 in the world.\nMembers of anonymous are called \"Anons\". When anons appear in public, they often wear Guy Fawkes masks. Guy Fawkes masks come from a graphic novel and film called \"V for Vendetta\". Some Anons also disguise their voice with voice changers (products that distort a user's voice) or text-to-speech programs.\nBeliefs and Values.\nAnons regularly have conflicting opinions, but mostly they are non-extremist and socialist. Anonymous does not have a hierarchy or a leader. Instead, anons work together because they have similar interests. Parmy Olson explains, \"There was no single leader pulling the levers, but a few organizational minds that sometimes pooled together to start planning a stunt.\"\nGenerally, anons fight censorship on the Internet, and they mostly target governments, organizations, and corporations who they believe to use censorship. Anons were early supporters of the global Occupy Movement and the Arab Spring.\nSince 2008, Anons have disagreed on whether Anonymous should focus on pranks and entertainment or serious activism.We [Anonymous] just happen to be a group of people on the Internet who need\u2014just kind of an outlet to do as we wish, that we wouldn't be able to do in regular society. ...That's more or less the point of it. Do as you wish. ... There's a common phrase: 'we are doing it for the lulz.'\n\u2014 Trent Peacock. \"Search Engine: The Face of Anonymous\", February 7, 2008.Members of Anonymous protest in legal and illegal ways. In 2012, Olson described Anonymous as a \"movement\" rather than a group: \"anyone can be part of it. It is a crowd of people, a nebulous crowd of people, working together and doing things together for various purposes.\"\nAnonymous has few rules. These rules include not sharing one's identity, not talking about the group, and not attacking media (such as news, television, and film).We are Anonymous. We are Legion. We do not forgive. We do not forget. Expect us.\n\u2014 Common tagline of Anonymous members."}
{"id": "44289", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44289", "title": "Faya", "text": ""}
{"id": "44290", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44290", "title": "Tourette's syndrome", "text": ""}
{"id": "44294", "revid": "904500", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44294", "title": "MTV", "text": "MTV (music television) is an American cable television network. They are based in New York City. The channel launched on August 1, 1981. They used to only show music videos. The first music video shown on MTV was \"Video Killed the Radio Star\" by The Buggles. Today, the channel shows many different television programs aimed at adolescents and young adults."}
{"id": "44297", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44297", "title": "Bundesautobahn 45", "text": "The Bundesautobahn 45 (\"in German: A 45\"), is a Motorway from the Ruhr area till Hanau.\nThe highway begins in Dortmund, North Rhine-Westphalia and crosses Hesse. The A 45 ends in Bavaria.\nExits on the A 45.\nList incomplete"}
{"id": "44299", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44299", "title": "AFC Ajax", "text": "Amsterdamsche Football Club Ajax (Ajax Amsterdam, AFC Ajax, or simply Ajax) is a football club from Amsterdam, Netherlands. They play in the Eredivisie, which is the highest football competition in The Netherlands. Players like Johan Cruyff, Van Basten, Frank Rijkaard, Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Jari Litmanen played for this club.\nHistory.\nThe club was founded on March 18, 1900. The founders were Floris Stempel, Carel Reeser and Johan Dade. It was the second attempt to found Ajax. In 1894 they tried it too. Ajax is named after the mythological hero Ajax the Great.\nAjax promoted to the highest level in 1911. Their coach was Jack Kirwan. Because Sparta Rotterdam had almost the same kit (clothes), they had to change it.\nStadium.\nThe name of the stadium is Amsterdam ArenA and has an attendance (which means the number of seats) of about 52.000. The Amsterdam ArenA was opened on 14 August 1996 by Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands. Their previous stadium was named De Meer."}
{"id": "44303", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44303", "title": "Fungicide", "text": "A fungicide is a poison. It is used to kill fungi that are considered unwanted."}
{"id": "44306", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44306", "title": "Chad Kroeger", "text": "Chad Robert Turton (better known as Chad Kroeger) is a Canadian singer and guitarist for the rock band, Nickelback. He was born on November 15, 1974, in Hanna, Alberta, Canada. \nKroeger is of American, English, German, Irish, Norwegian, Scottish, Swiss-German, and Welsh descent. Kroeger became engaged to Canadian singer Avril Lavigne in 2012. The couple married in 2013 and separated in 2015.\nNickelback consists of four band members. Chad Kroeger (vocals, lead guitar), Mike Kroeger (bass guitar), Ryan Peake (rhythm guitar) and Daniel Adair (drums). "}
{"id": "44309", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44309", "title": "Consecutive integer", "text": "Consecutive numbers are numbers that follow each other in order. They have a difference of 1 between every two numbers. In a set of consecutive numbers, the mean and the median are equal. \nIf \"n\" is a number, then the next numbers will be \"n+1\" and \"n+2\". \nConsecutive numbers that follow each other in order:\nConsecutive even numbers.\nConsecutive even numbers are even numbers that follow each other. They have a difference of 2 between every two numbers.\nIf \"n\" is an even integer, then \"n,\" \"n\"+2, \"n\"+4 and \"n\"+6 will be consecutive even numbers.\nFor example - 2,4,6,8,10,12,14,18 etc.\nConsecutive odd numbers.\nConsecutive odd numbers are odd numbers that follow each other. Like consecutive odd numbers, they have a difference of 2 between every two numbers.\nIf \"n\" is an odd integer, then \"n,\" \"n\"+2, \"n\"+4 and \"n\"+6 will be consecutive odd numbers.\n3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, etc.\n\u221223, \u221221, \u221219, \u221217, \u221215, -13, -11"}
{"id": "44311", "revid": "6563316", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44311", "title": "Beowulf (hero)", "text": "Beowulf is the hero of the Anglo-Saxon poem \"Beowulf\". He was the son of Ecg\u00feeow, a banished warrior of the W\u00e6gmundings. Ecg\u00feeow had killed a man from another clan and had to flee to the Danes. The Danish king Hro\u00f0gar accepted him as one of his warriors. The king also paid to repay the blood feud that was threatening Ecg\u00feeow.\nWhen King Hro\u00f0gar came upon difficulties because his land was raided by the giant Grendel- a descendant of Cain, and cursed-, Ecg\u00feeow's son Beowulf came to help him with twelve warriors. During the night, Grendel arrived to attack the sleeping men. Grendel gruesomely slaughtered one man before anyone awoke, but Beowulf attacked him. Beowulf had earlier decided to fight without his sword because he thought it would be shameful to fight with unequal weaponry. He, however, outmatched Grendel in strength and tore off his arm. Grendel fled back to his cave, where he died and his arm was fixed to the wall like a trophy. During the following night, Grendel's Mother arrived and Beowulf had an even harder fight against her, as she stole back her son's arm and retreated to her underwater cave. Beowulf followed her and spent a day sinking to the bottom of the lake, and they fought it out a while before Beowulf saw a sword, which conveniently was the only sword that could possibly kill Grendel's mother. He stabbed her with it, and she died. The sword dissolved and he found and beheaded Grendel's body. He brought back the head as a trophy. Beowulf was greatly rewarded for both of these feats, and he and his men were showered in glory and riches. All the gold was presented to their king, and Beowulf was rewarded with a great sword, land, a hall, and the throne of the Geats when the current king dies.\nLater on in life, Beowulf ruled over his native Geatland for 50 years until a dragon attacked after a golden goblet was stolen from its cave by a slave. He travels to its cave and successfully slays it, but is severely injured in the melee. He was bitten in the neck, and the venom will kill him. The dying Beowulf then crowns a young warrior called Wiglaf as his successor (as he himself does not have children and all his predecessors have died). Wiglaf is one of the 12 soldiers he took with him to fight the dragon, but the only one who stayed when they saw he was losing. He is then burned on a pyre with all of his gold he won by slaying the dragon. \nIn Adaptions.\nThere have been many fictional books and films made based on \"Beowulf\". Beowulf appeared in most of them. "}
{"id": "44312", "revid": "508885", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44312", "title": "Clan", "text": "A clan is a group of people who \u2013 following a tradition \u2013 belong to the same kin. The word comes from the Gaelic language, and means 'family'. It is similar in meaning to the more general word tribe.\nIn Europe, the best-known clans system is that in Scotland, which still has some effects today, especially in the Scottish Highlands and Islands. It existed before the land was unified under a Scottish king, and continued long afterwards. Clans also\nexisted in Ireland"}
{"id": "44313", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44313", "title": "Muon-catalyzed fusion", "text": "Muon-catalyzed fusion (\u03bcCF) is a type of cold nuclear fusion, which means that nuclear fusion can happen at low temperatures and under normal pressure. There need to be 3 particles: a muon, a positively charged triton and a positively charged deuteron. The muon, which has a greater mass (when its not moving) than an electron, drags the heavier triton and the deuteron to it, creating something called a muonic heavy hydrogen ion. This means that the particle is a hydrogen atom with more protons then electrons, that contains a muon, and that contains extra neutrons which make it heavier. This reaction can be done at room temperature or below, such as -270 degrees Celsius.\nTo create these, a stream of negative muons is sent onto blocks of protium, deuterium and tritium (3 first isotopes of hydrogen). The muon bumps out the electron in the hydrogen atom. Because the electron is replaced, any 2 atoms are bound together. This makes a molecular ion, also called a special muonic molecule. A muon is 207 times more massive then an electron. Because of the difference in mass, the atom changes. Because it is heavier, the atoms in the molecular ion are pressed very tightly together, and then the nuclei, the centers of the atoms, join together. The following process is called nuclear fusion. The 2 nuclei join together and \"glue\" together. But, their weights do not just add up, a part of their mass is released as energy. This is the energy used. \nNow, the process continues because the muon is thrown out of the nuclei when they fuse, so it can join other nuclei, which continues the reaction. Sometimes the muon is attached to something else thrown out from the nucleus, and the muon is lost. This stops the reaction. \nThe good thing about this is that muon-catalyzed fusion uses little energy, and produces much energy. The only problem is that the reaction is not stable, so it does not last a long time, because the muons are lost. This process is still a long way from being used for business."}
{"id": "44322", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44322", "title": "Berber", "text": "Berber might refer to:"}
{"id": "44323", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44323", "title": "Nomadic people", "text": "Nomadic people (or nomads) are people who move from one place to another, instead of living in one place. The best known examples in Europe are gypsies, Roma, Sinti, and Irish travelers. Many other ethnic groups and communities are traditionally nomadic; such as Berbers, Kazakhs, and Bedouin.\nPeople are nomads for many reasons. Most nomads are family men herding their livestock, such as cattle, or horses from pasture to pasture. These people have to change places because of the weather. Other nomads are traders and craftsmen (people who make things), traveling to exchange goods or to practice their craft where it is needed.\nNomads who follow their herds usually live in tents with few things inside, like the Mongols. Nomads who trade or practice crafts usually have wagons in which they travel, because wagons are better for carrying goods.\nThe Sami of Lapland are semi-nomadic tribe following a herd of reindeer. They are a migratory people who lead their own herd of reindeer to winter feeding grounds and then return them in the spring to their feeding ground close to a permanent home base, where their family lives. This cycle happens every year. \nThe skills of nomadic life can also be useful in mobile warfare, and have been used in attacking sedentary agricultural and urban people. Genghis Khan and the Mongol hordes, for example conquered vast areas in Asia by organizing themselves as cavalry."}
{"id": "44324", "revid": "5870278", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44324", "title": "Geodesic dome", "text": "A geodesic dome is a type of structure that looks like half a ball shape (like half a soccer ball), made of many little shapes, usually triangles. It often is made of glass, concrete, or steel. They are cheap to make, and bigger than square buildings. It was first created in 20th century by an American engineer, Buckminster Fuller."}
{"id": "44325", "revid": "11594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44325", "title": "Berbers", "text": ""}
{"id": "44326", "revid": "259484", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44326", "title": "Nomads", "text": ""}
{"id": "44327", "revid": "259485", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44327", "title": "Nomad", "text": ""}
{"id": "44331", "revid": "309668", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44331", "title": "Coprolalia", "text": "Coprolalia is a condition that affects about 15% of people with Tourette syndrome. Someone with coprolalia will use words that make people feel uncomfortable so often that it is hard to control. This is often in the form of a stream of curse words.\nPeople who have Tourette syndrome are not the only people who experience coprolalia. For example, it can happen in people who have had a stroke, or who have schizophrenia."}
{"id": "44332", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44332", "title": "Billy Talent", "text": "Billy Talent, before called Pezz, is a Canadian punk rock band from Mississauga, Ontario. The name Billy Talent was inspired by the guitarist \"Billy Tallent\" from the Michael Turner novel \"Hard Core Logo\". They performed and recorded together for about 10 years before becoming famous. "}
{"id": "44334", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44334", "title": "Will and testament", "text": ""}
{"id": "44337", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44337", "title": "Aetyonyx", "text": ""}
{"id": "44338", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44338", "title": "Don Cheadle", "text": ".Donald Frank Cheadle Jr. (/\u02c8t\u0283i\u02d0d\u0259l/; born November 29, 1964) is an American actor, author, director, producer and writer. Following early roles in \"Hamburger Hill\" (1987), and as the gangster \"Rocket\" in the film \"Colors\" (1988), Cheadle built his career in the 1990s with roles in \"Devil in a Blue Dress\" (1995), \"Rosewood\" (1997) and \"Boogie Nights\" (1997). His collaboration with director Steven Soderbergh resulted in the films \"Out of Sight\" (1998), \"Traffic\" (2000) and \"The Ocean's Trilogy\" (2001\u20132007).\nCheadle was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for his lead role as Rwandan hotel manager Paul Rusesabagina in the historical genocide drama film \"Hotel Rwanda\" (2004). From 2012 to 2016, he starred as Marty Kaan on the Showtime comedy series \"House of Lies\"; he won a Golden Globe Award in 2013 for the role.\nCheadle extended his global recognition with his role as the superhero War Machine in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, replacing Terrence Howard. He currently appeared in \"Iron Man 2\" (2010), \"Iron Man 3\" (2013), ' (2015), ' (2016), \"\" (2018), \"Captain Marvel\" (2019) and \"Avengers: Endgame\" (2019) and will appear in the upcoming Disney+ series Iron Heart.\nFilm and television work.\nCheadle became eligible for his Screen Actors Guild (SAG) card when he appeared as a burger joint employee in the 1985 comedy \"Moving Violations\". In 1987 he received a small role in episode 19, season 7 of \"Hill Street Blues\" where he played a teenager with learning difficulties. Followed by an appearance in \"Hamburger Hill\" the same year; Cheadle secured the role of Jack in the April 1, 1988, \"Jung and the Restless\" episode of \"Night Court\". Although his character was 16 years old, Cheadle was 23 at the time.\nCheadle then played the role of Rocket in the 1988 movie \"Colors\". In 1989, he appeared in a video for Angela Winbush's No. 2 hit single \"It's the Real Thing\", performing dance moves in an orange jumpsuit, working at a car wash. In 1990, he appeared in an episode of \"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air\" titled \"Homeboy, Sweet Homeboy\", playing Will Smith's friend and Hilary's first love interest, Ice Tray. In 1992, he played a supporting role in \"The Golden Girls\" spin-off \"The Golden Palace\". Cheadle subsequently played district attorney John Littleton on three seasons of \"Picket Fences\".\nCheadle first received widespread notice for his portrayal of Mouse Alexander in the film \"Devil in a Blue Dress\", for which he won Best Supporting Actor awards from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association and the National Society of Film Critics and was nominated for similar awards from the Screen Actors Guild and the NAACP Image Awards. Following soon thereafter was his performance in the title role of the 1996 HBO TV movie \"Rebound: The Legend of Earl \"The Goat\" Manigault\". He also starred in the 1997 film \"Volcano\", directed by Mick Jackson.Don Cheadle also starred in Rush Hour 2 (2001), with Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker..\nCheadle's television credits include Emmy-nominated performances in the movies \"The Rat Pack\", \"A Lesson Before Dying\", \"Things Behind the Sun\" and in a guest appearance on \"ER\". The last of these spanned four episodes during the show's ninth season, in which he portrayed Paul Nathan, a medical student struggling to cope with Parkinson's disease. He has made appearances in films including \"Rosewood\", \"The Family Man\", \"Boogie Nights\", \"Out of Sight\", \"Traffic\", and \"Ocean's Eleven\". These last three were directed by Steven Soderbergh. He made a cameo appearance in the film \"Abby Singer\". In 2005, Cheadle was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Paul Rusesabagina in the film \"Hotel Rwanda\". He also starred in and co-produced \"Crash\", which won the 2006 Academy Award for Best Picture. For his performance in \"Crash\", Cheadle was nominated for the BAFTA and Screen Actors Guild Awards for Best Supporting Actor. He played the main character in the movie \"Traitor\".\nIn March 2007, Cheadle starred with comedian Adam Sandler in Mike Binder's \"Reign Over Me\", a comedy-drama about a man who has slipped away from reality after the death of his wife and three daughters in 9/11. The film was a box office flop, earning a domestic gross of $22.2 million. Cheadle later starred in the 2009 DreamWorks Pictures film \"Hotel for Dogs\". Cheadle was to make his directorial debut with the adaptation of Elmore Leonard's \"Tishomingo Blues\", but in July 2007 he stated, \"'Tishomingo' is dead...\"\nCheadle appeared in NFL commercials promoting the Super Bowl from 2002 to 2005. He so regularly appeared for the NFL in its Super Bowl advertising that in 2006, in a drive to get fans to submit their own advertising ideas, the NFL sought his permission to reference his previous commercials to portray themselves as having no new ideas: \"he quickly signed off on the idea and found it funny.\" Abe Sutton (along with Etan Bednarsh), one of the finalists in this NFL contest, played on this commercial by proposing an ad where every player on a football team is Don Cheadle.\nIn 2009, Cheadle and \"Boondocks\" creator Aaron McGruder worked on a potential comedy show on NBC. The \"project revolve[d] around mismatched brothers who reunite to open a private security company.\" Cheadle and McGruder were slated to serve as executive producers, while McGruder was expected to write the script.\nAlso in 2009, Cheadle performed in \"The People Speak\", a documentary feature film that uses dramatic and musical performances of the letters, diaries, and speeches of everyday Americans, based on historian Howard Zinn's \"A People's History of the United States\".\nIn 2010, Cheadle assumed the role of War Machine / James Rhodes in \"Iron Man 2\" (2010), replacing Terrence Howard. Cheadle currently reprised this role in \"Iron Man 3\" (2013), \"Avengers: Age of Ultron\" (2015), \"Captain America: Civil War\" (2016), \"Avengers: Infinity War\" (2018), \"Avengers: Endgame\" (2019) and will reprise it in the Disney+ series Iron Heart.\nFrom 2012 to 2016, Cheadle starred in the Showtime TV series \"House of Lies\". In 2013, he won the Golden Globe as Best Actor in a Comedy Series for his role on the show.\nCheadle spent ten years writing and producing the film \"Miles Ahead\" (2016) based on the life of jazz musician Miles Davis. Cheadle also directed and starred in the film. Locations for the movie were found in Cincinnati.\nIn 2018, Cheadle guest-starred in the first-season finale of \"DuckTales\", providing Donald Duck's new voice box.\nSome of the movies he was in are:"}
{"id": "44339", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44339", "title": "Massospondylus", "text": "Massospondylus was a dinosaur from the Upper Triassic to the Lower Jurassic periods."}
{"id": "44349", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44349", "title": "MIRC", "text": "mIRC is a popular shareware Internet Relay Chat (IRC) client for Microsoft Windows. It was created in 1995 by Khaled Mardam-Bey in C. Its most recent update (7.25) was made in 2012. It is licensed as Proprietary. It comes free of charge for 30 days and then you have the choice to buy it for $20 USD, or continue using but the program will ask you to buy it at each launch."}
{"id": "44350", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44350", "title": "For Dummies", "text": "The ...for dummies is a series of books that try to explain something very simply. The series was created in 1991 by Dan Gookin. The first book was about the computer operating system MS-DOS. Dan Gookin created the book, because in 1987 a person wanted a book that was simple and easy to read, as the person considered computer books to be dull at that time. After MS-DOS for dummies, came PC's for Dummies by Gookin, and Andy Rathbone. Other popular ...For Dummies books are The Internet for Dummies by John Levine, Carol Baroudi, and Margaret Levine Young, and Beginning Programming for Dummies by Wallace Wang. The book cover is usually yellow and black, with the name in white letters on the black part."}
{"id": "44353", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44353", "title": "The Source (Charmed)", "text": "The Source is a fictional character in the television series \"Charmed\". The Source of All Evil is vanquished by the Power of Three in the fourth season of the show. Cole Turner (Phoebe's fiancee) takes his place as the ruler of the Underworld. Once he is killed, the Charmed Ones are free."}
{"id": "44354", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44354", "title": "Takasaki line", "text": "The is a railway line that runs from Omiya station in Saitama Prefecture to Takasaki Station in the Gunma Prefecture. It runs diagonally from south to north in Saitama prefecture and is owed and operated by the East Japan Railway Company (JR East Japan). The national highway route 17 and its historical predecessor Nakasendo run near this line.\nThe fare between Takasaki and Omiya of the Takasaki line is 1280 yen.\nThe colors of the cars are green and orange. So it looks similar to the Utsunomiya line.\nThe maximum speed of this train . So it is possible to go Takasaki from Omiya in about an hour and a half.\nThe Takasaki line including local trains and rapid trains has generally six standard-runs per hour in daytime. According to the time, the train might be crowded with students and company employees in major cities, for example, Ageo, Okegawa, Kitamoto, Kounosu, Kumagaya, Fukaya, Honjo."}
{"id": "44355", "revid": "1149257", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44355", "title": "Red panda", "text": "The red panda (\"Ailurus fulgens\") is a mammal. It is the only species of the Ailuridae family. There are two subspecies: \"Ailurus fulgens fulgens\" and \"Ailurus fulgens styani\".\nOverview.\nMost that are bred at Japanese zoos are \"Ailurus fulgens styani\". They are called \u30ec\u30c3\u30b5\u30fc\u30d1\u30f3\u30c0 in Japan and \u5c0f\u718a\u8c93 (xi\u01ceo x\u00econg m\u0101o ) in China, both literally translating to English as \"small bear cat\". They have become popular for how they look. The IUCN classes them as 'vulnerable'\nThe red panda is not closely related to the giant panda: they are in different families, but share a vegetarian diet. They have both adapted to eating plant material, which is unusual for members of the Carnivora.\nA scientist by the name Brian Houghton Hodgson was one of the first people to look more deeply into the Red Panda because up until he did, there was not much known about the species. In addition to Bamboo, the Red Panda also eats fruits, tuberous roots, acorns, and beechmast. The Red Panda is not necessarily nocturnal but is classified as crepuscular which means they are active around dawn and sleep during the night and midday. Besides how they slept, Hodgson observed that they were monogamous and only breed once a year. \nHabitat.\nThe red panda lives in the southern part of China, Sikkim, Nepal, and the Himalaya mountains in high trees. In the Indian kingdom of Sikkim it is the state animal. As an endangered species it is protected by laws in the countries where it lives.\nAppearance and life.\nRed pandas are about 50-60 centimeters long. They weigh between three and five kilograms. They have chestnut colored hair, and their faces have white designs. They eat fruits, roots, bamboo shoots, acorns, and insects. They are active at night and sleep on trees in the daytime. They act alone, not in groups. They eat blossoms, berries, various plants, and bird eggs.\nReferences.\nGlatston, A. R. (2011). Red panda biology and conservation of the first panda (1st ed.). Academic Press."}
{"id": "44363", "revid": "412970", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44363", "title": "Refraction", "text": "Refraction is the change in direction of a wave, caused by the change in the wave's speed. Examples of waves include sound waves and light waves. Refraction is seen most often when a wave passes from one transparent medium to another transparent medium. Different types of medium include air and water. \nWhen a wave passes from one transparent medium to another transparent medium, the wave will change its speed and its direction. For example, when a light wave travels through air and then passes into water, the wave will slow and change direction.\nAs light goes into a medium which is denser, the light ray will 'bend' toward the normal. When it goes back into the less dense medium (with a lower refractive index), it will bend back through the same angle as when it came in (if the surface at exit is parallel to the surface at entry).\nAn example of how refraction works is placing a straw in a cup of water, with part of the straw in the water. When looking at a certain angle, the straw appears to bend at the water's surface. This is because of the change in density of the medium and thus, bending of light rays as they move from the air to water.\nA good and simple way to understand how light works is to think of it like a car. When the car hits the gravel surface (this is the medium) on an angle, the tire that hits it first will slow, causing it to turn in that direction. Therefore, if light hits a medium on the right having a greater refractive index, it will bend right. The amount of bending is given by . Lenses work by refraction.\nWhen light refracts in a prism, it splits into colours of the rainbow because some wavelengths bend more than others. \nIn optics the refractive index or index of refraction \"n\" of a substance is a dimensionless number that describes how light, or other radiation, goes through that medium. It is defined as \nwhere c is the speed of light in a vacuum and \"v\" is the \"phase velocity\" of light in the medium. Snell's law uses refractive indexes to calculate the amount of refraction."}
{"id": "44366", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44366", "title": "Fargo", "text": ""}
{"id": "44372", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44372", "title": "Magic moushroom", "text": ""}
{"id": "44373", "revid": "1052699", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44373", "title": "Psychedelic mushroom", "text": "Magic mushrooms or psychedelic mushrooms or Psilocybin mushrooms contain the alkaloid psilocybin, or similar substances. \nPsilocybin is a mind-altering chemical. It changes the brain to an altered state of mind, or a different state of consciousness. This can lead to effects like hallucinations or visions. They may be used for medical purposes to treat cluster headaches, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and certain kinds of depression.\n\"Psilocybe semilanceata\" is the classic example of a magic mushroom, but there are quite a few others. These fungi also have some species with psilocybin: \"Copelandia\", \"Gymnopilus\", \"Inocybe\", \"Mycena\", \"Panaeolus\", \"Pholiotina\", \"Pluteus\".\nPsilocybin can kill in extremely high doses. The LD50 of psilocybin is 280\u00a0mg/kg for rats, this is about 1.5 times that of caffeine. In normal psychedelic mushrooms, psilocybin makes up about 1% of their weight. Therefore, nearly 1.7 kilograms of dried mushrooms, or 17 kilograms of fresh mushrooms, would be required for a 60\u00a0kg person to reach the 280\u00a0mg/kg LD50 rate of rats.\nPsilocybin mushrooms have probably been used since prehistoric times. They may be seen in rock art. Many cultures have used these mushrooms in religious rites. Psychedelic mushrooms have been used by native peoples of Mesoamerica for religious communion and healing. Catholic missionaries were against the use of magic mushrooms. In Modern society, they are sometimes used recreationally. Their medical use in psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy is studied, for example, in the treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer, the treatment of depression and to help quit smoking.\nThe function of compounds like this in nature is they reduce the likelihood of the mushroom being eaten before its spores have been scattered. It is a defence against herbivory."}
{"id": "44374", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44374", "title": "Psychedelic mushrooms", "text": ""}
{"id": "44386", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44386", "title": "Heavy Metal", "text": ""}
{"id": "44389", "revid": "4975", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44389", "title": "Bharata (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "44390", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44390", "title": "Republic of India", "text": ""}
{"id": "44402", "revid": "7864909", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44402", "title": "Harold Godwinson", "text": "Harold Godwinson was King Harold II of England (c. 1022 \u2013 14 October 1066). He ruled England after king Edward the Confessor died. He ruled from 5 January 1066 until he was killed at the Battle of Hastings. His death marked the Norman conquest of England and the end of Anglo-Saxon England.\nProbably, he was the maternal grandfather of the Moscow founder Yuri Dolgorukiy.\nCareer.\nHarold was the son of Godwin, Earl of Wessex, and Gytha, a Danish noblewoman. His sister, Edith, was married to the king he succeeded, Edward the Confessor. About that same time Harold became Earl of East Anglia. When his father died in 1053, Harold inherited his earldom of Wessex. Elfgar, son of Leofric of Mercia was appointed to replace Harold in East Anglia. Berkshire and Somerset were joined to Wessex again. Wessex itself was, in those days, an enormous amount of land that covered about a third of England. Harold ruled over a large portion of England, making him the most powerful man in the whole kingdom, after the King.\nHarold Godwinson had three brothers: Tostig, Swegen and Gryth. He claimed to have been made King by Edward the Confessor. Before Harold Godwinson became king, he swore to help William, Duke of Normandy to become king. \nIn September 1066 Harold Godwinson defeated an invasion from the north by Harald Hardrada. He returned south to fight Duke William's invasion. He was killed, it is generally assumed, by an arrow shot by one of William's archers, but some reports say he was cut down by many soldiers. "}
{"id": "44404", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44404", "title": "Spanish Armada", "text": "The Spanish Armada was a Spanish naval fleet (army of ships) that was most famous for being used by King Philip II of Spain against England in 1588. The ships were on their way to Flanders, across the English Channel, to fetch an army to invade England. However, the Royal Navy of England during Queen Elizabeth I of England\u2019s reign caught up with the ships on the way. The English defeated the Armada by using the wind, twhich blew the ships, to light them on fire into the anchored fleet. This started on 12 July 1588 and ended during August 1588.\nThe second-in-command of the Royal Navy was Sir Francis Drake. A story is that he was playing a game of bowling with his friends when he heard of the attack, but he boldly insisted that he had time to finish the game and then to defeat the Spanish Armada. The story was first written 100 years after the events, however, and so it may have never happened.\nThe Spanish Armada was led by Spanish Duke of Medina Sidonia. He had no naval experience but replaced the original commander, who had died in February. \nReasons.\nThe Anglo-Spanish War of 1585 to 1604 had several causes:\nIn April 1587, while the Armada was being prepared, Sir Francis Drake\u2019s burned over 20 Spanish ships in the Spanish port of Cadiz .\nDefeat.\nThe Spanish defeat of the Armada is often attributed to a severe storm that scattered the Spanish vessels before they met the British fleet. The Spanish could not use the many more ships they had to their advantage as planned. The English had only 55 ships. They were not bigger but carried more guns. The Spanish had only short-range cannons, but the English had long-range cannons. Part of the English strategy was to sink or damage the enemy ships before they got close enough to fire back at them.\nThe English ships were also more manoeuvrable. The Spanish galleons could have their oars broken off completely by a heavy vessel sailing past nearby. The morale and dedication of the British sailors was high and ewas improved by the famous speech by Queen Elizabeth and loyalty to England. They also were led by experienced captains, who had years of naval battles behind them. \nThe defeated Spanish fled north through the North Sea with the English chasing them. Many more ships were lost, and thousands of men died during the retreat. \nEven though the English sailors had done so well, they failed to get paid and were made to stay on their ships and 'Guard' in case there was another Spanish attack. Lord Howard of Effingham was shocked,when he found out that his soldiers were not getting paid. He said. \"I would rather have never a penny in the world, than they (his sailors) should lack...\" (\"I would rather die poor than see my men go unpaid)\".\nA year later, Queen Elizabeth of England sent a similar English Armada of more than 100 ships and 19,000 troops to complete her victory. It was to seize a fleet of Spanish treasure ships and to impose a new king on Portugal. However, that expedition also failed. \nA second Spanish Armada in 1596 and a third in 1597 also failed. \nReasons for failure.\nUnrealistic expectations.\nKing Philip II of Spain had a poor understanding of his plan of action. He believed that God was on his side, which was a faulty understanding of reality.\nFrancis Drake\u2019s raid on Cadiz.\nAs the Armada was being prepared, English Admiral Sir Francis Drake launched a daring raid on the Spanish port of Cadiz, which disrupted the Spanish preparations and forced the invasion to be postponed until 1588.\nDuke of Medina-Sidonia.\nThe Duke of Medina-Sidonia had been selected for not his skills as an admiral but his noble birth. He was not very confident to lead such a huge armada against the English naval ships.\nLack of experienced gunners.\nThe Spanish lacked experienced gunners on their ships. On the other hand, the English fleet roughly had one man in ten as a gunnery specialist. That meant that that every gun crew was supervised by someone with the relevant skills and experience. As a result, when the battle came, the English fired two or three times faster.\nPoorer ammunition.\nThe Spanish carried more ammunition for their cannons than the English, but it was not as good. Iron ore in Spain was inferior in that found in England. The situation was made worse by the rush to produce ammunition for the expedition. To speed production, cannon balls had been cooled in water, which weakened their structure.\nThe Weather.\nEven before they reached their destination, the Spanish ships had been scattered by storms twice. Some were damaged, others were lost, and there were long delays while they regrouped. That was an omen of what was to come, with storms smashing the fleet as it fled the English. It then limped home around the British Isles.\nFire ships.\nThe English used fire ships against the Spanish fleet but did not sink any enemy ship. However, they forced the Spanish to scatter, and ships were damaged as they collided with each other. That gave the English an advantage in the days that followed."}
{"id": "44405", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44405", "title": "Terminal station", "text": ""}
{"id": "44406", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44406", "title": "Frank Griswold", "text": "Frank Tracy Griswold III (born 18 September 1937 in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania) was the 25th Presiding Bishop and Primate of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America.\nGriswold went to school at St. Paul's School in Concord, New Hampshire. He earned an A.B. in English literature from Harvard College (1959). He attended the General Theological Seminary and earned his B.A. and M.A, in theology from Oriel College, Oxford University (1962, 1966). Griswold became a priest in 1963. He became a priest in Pennsylvania. He worked at three churches there. Frank Griswold was the bishop of Chicago from 1987 until he became presiding bishop in 1997.\nGriswold is a member of the Joint Standing Committee of the Primates of the Anglican Communion and the Anglican Consultative Council. He was co-chair of the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission from 1998 to 2003. He was a member of the standing committee for the 1998 Lambeth Conference. He has also served on diocesan, national and international committees for liturgy, worship and ecumenism. He is also a member of The Fellowship of Saint John.\nHis term as presiding bishop ended on November first 2006. He was replaced by the Rt. Reverand Katharine Jefferts Schori. She was elected by the General Convention of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America."}
{"id": "44408", "revid": "1117958", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44408", "title": "Sun", "text": "The Sun is a star which is located at the center of our solar system. It is a yellow dwarf star that gives off different types of energy such as infra-red energy (heat), ultraviolet light, radio waves and light. It also gives off a stream of particles, which reaches Earth as \"solar wind\". The source of all this energy is nuclear fusion. Nuclear fusion is the reaction in the star which turns hydrogen into helium and makes huge amounts of energy.\nThe Sun is a star like many others in our Milky Way galaxy. The Sun is a type of star called a G-type main-sequence star based on its spectral class. It has existed for a little over 4.5 billion years. It is going to continue for at least as long. The Sun is about a hundred times as wide as the Earth. It has a mass of . This is 333,000 times the mass of the Earth. 1.3 million Earths can fit inside the Sun.\nThe Sun fuses about 600 million tons of hydrogen into helium every second. It can take between 10,000 and 170,000 years for the energy in the core of the Sun to escape.\nGeneral characteristics.\nThe Sun is a G-type main-sequence star. The Sun has about 99.86% of the mass of the Solar System. The Sun has an absolute magnitude of +4.83. It is estimated to be brighter than about 85% of the stars in the Milky Way galaxy. The Sun is a Population I star. That means it is a metal-rich fairly young star.\nThe Sun is the brightest object in the Earth's sky. It has an apparent magnitude of \u221226.74. It takes 8 minutes and 19 seconds for light to travel from the Sun's horizon to Earth's horizon.\nPhysics of the Sun.\nOrigin.\nScientists think that the Sun started from a very large cloud of dust and small bits of ice about 4.567 billion years ago.\nAt the center of that huge cloud, gravity caused the material to build up into a ball. Once this got big enough, the huge pressure inside started a fusion reaction. The energy this released caused that ball to heat and shine.\nThe energy radiated from the Sun pushed away the rest of the cloud from itself, and the planets formed from the rest of this cloud.\nHow it works.\nThe sun can also be used as a source of solar energy.\nOrbit.\nThe Sun and everything that orbits it is in the Milky Way. The Sun orbits around the centre of the Milky Way. It takes along everything in the Solar System. The Sun moves at 820,000\u00a0km an hour. At that speed, it still takes 230 million years for a full orbit.\nVisible features.\nSince the Sun is all gas, surface features come and go. If the Sun is viewed through a special solar telescope, dark areas called sunspots can be seen. These areas are caused by the Sun's magnetic field. The sunspots only look dark because the rest of the Sun is very bright.\nSome space telescopes, including the ones that orbit the Sun have seen huge arches of the Sun's matter extend suddenly from the Sun. These are called solar prominences. Solar prominences come in many different shapes and sizes. Some of them are so large that the Earth could fit inside of them, and a few are shaped like hands. Solar flares also come and go.\nSunspots, prominences and flares become rare, and then numerous, and then rare again, every 11 years.\nPhotosphere.\nThis is the surface of the Sun. The light that the Earth receives from the Sun is radiated from this layer. Below this layer, the Sun is opaque, or not transparent to light.\nComposition.\nThe Sun is mainly composed of hydrogen and helium. All elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, accounts for less than 2% of the mass of the Sun.\nThe Sun's chemical composition was gotten from the interstellar medium. The hydrogen and most of the helium in the Sun would have been produced by Big Bang nucleosynthesis in the first 20 minutes of the universe. The heavier elements were produced by stars that died before the Sun was formed. The heavier elements were released into the interstellar medium when the star exploded as a supernovae.\nAtmosphere.\nFive layers make up the atmosphere of the Sun. The chromosphere, transition region, and corona are much hotter than the outer photosphere surface of the Sun. It is believed that Alfv\u00e9n waves may pass through to heat the corona.\nThe minimum temperature zone, the coolest layer of the Sun, is about above the photosphere. It has a temperature of about . This part of the Sun is cool enough to allow simple molecules such as carbon monoxide and water to form. These molecules can be seen on the Sun with special instruments called spectroscopes.\nThe chromosphere is the first layer of the Sun which can be seen, especially during a solar eclipse when the moon is covering most of the Sun and blocking the brightest light.\nThe solar transition region is the part of the Sun's atmosphere, between the chromosphere and outer part called the corona. It can be seen from space using telescopes that can sense ultraviolet light. The transition is between two very different layers. In the bottom part it touches the photosphere and gravity shapes the features. At the top, the transition layer touches the corona.\nThe corona is the outer atmosphere of the Sun and is much bigger than the rest of the Sun. The corona continuously expands into space forming the solar wind, which fills all the Solar System. The average temperature of the corona and solar wind is about . In the hottest regions it is . We do not understand why the corona is so hot. It can be seen during a solar eclipse or with an instrument called a coronagraph.\nThe heliosphere is the thin outer atmosphere of the Sun, filled with the solar wind plasma. It extends out past the orbit of Pluto to the heliopause, where it forms a boundary where it collides with the interstellar medium.\nEclipses.\nA solar eclipse appears when the moon is between the Earth and Sun. The last total solar eclipse occurred on December 26, 2019, and was visible from Saudi Arabia, India, Sumatra and Borneo, with a partial eclipse visible in Australia and much of Asia. \nA lunar eclipse happens when the moon passes through the shadow of the Earth which can only occur during a full moon.The number of lunar eclipses in a single year can range from 0 to 3. Partial eclipses slightly outnumber total eclipses by 7 to 6.\nFate of the Sun.\nAstrophysicists say our Sun is a G-type main-sequence star in the middle of its life. In a billion years or so, increased solar energy will boil away the Earth's atmosphere and oceans. In a few more billion years, they think the Sun will get bigger and become a red giant star. The Sun would be up to 250 times its current size, as big as and will swallow up the Earth.\nEarth's fate is still a bit of a mystery. In the long term, the Earth's future depends on the Sun, and the Sun is going to be fairly stable for the next 5 billion years. Calculations suggest that the Earth might move to a wider orbit. This is because about 30% of the Sun's mass will blow away in the solar wind. However, in the very long term the Earth will probably be destroyed as the Sun increases in size. Stars like the Sun become red giants at a later stage. The Sun will expand beyond orbits of Mercury, Venus, and probably Earth. In any event, the ocean and air would have vanished before the Sun gets to that stage.\nAfter the Sun reaches a point where it can no longer get bigger, it will lose its layers and form a planetary nebula. Eventually, the Sun will shrink into a white dwarf. Then, over several hundred billion or even a trillion years, the Sun would fade into a black dwarf."}
{"id": "44418", "revid": "922817", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44418", "title": "Sign of the cross", "text": "The sign of the cross is a physical gesture made by Catholic and Orthodox Christians, and sometimes also Protestants. It is usually done at the start and end of prayers. \nIn the Catholic tradition, the right hand goes from the forehead, to the chest, and then to the left and right shoulders (the order of shoulders does not matter). This is sometimes done while saying \"Father, Son, Holy Spirit.\"\nIn the Orthodox tradition, the tips of the thumb and the middle and index fingers are put together, and the ring finger and little finger are put against the palm. The first three fingers are for faith in the Trinity, and the other two fingers are for the two natures of Jesus, divine and human."}
{"id": "44426", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44426", "title": "Seljuk dynasty", "text": "The Seljuks (also Seldjuk, Seldjuq, Seljuq, sometimes also Seljuq Turks) were a Muslim dynasty. They ruled parts of Central Asia and the Middle East from the 11th to 14th centuries. Their empire was known as Great Seljuk Empire that stretched from Anatolia to Pakistan. The Seljuks also fought the Christians in the First Crusade.\nThe Seljuks were one of the cultural ancestors of the Western Turks, the present-day inhabitants of Azerbaijan, Turkey, and Turkmenistan. Originally, the House of Seljuq was a branch of the \"Kinik\" Oghuz Turks who in the 9th century lived in the steppes north of the Caspian and Aral Seas.\nSeljuk Rulers of Kerman 1041-1187.\nKerman was a nation in southern Persia. It fell in 1187, probably conquered by To\u011fr\u00fcl III of Great Seljuk.\nSeljuk Rulers in Syria 1076-1117.\nSultans/Emirs of Damascus:\nAtabegs of Aleppo:"}
{"id": "44427", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44427", "title": "Jell-O", "text": "Jell-O is a brand name for a dessert. It is known for a number of gelatin desserts, such as fruit gels, puddings, and unbaked cream pies. including fruit gels, puddings and no-bake cream pies.\nDescription.\nJell-O is sold as all prepared (ready to eat) or in powder form, and it is has many different colors and flavors. The powder has powdered gelatin, sugar, and artificial sweeteners. It is melted into hot water, and then chilled and eaten. Sometimes other ingredients are added to make them taste better. Jell-O must be put in a refrigerator until it is served, and usually eaten with a spoon.\nThere are also pudding and pie under the Jell-O brand. To make pudding, they are cooked on the stove with milk, then eaten.\nThough the word \"Jell-O\" is a name brand, it is commonly used in the United States as a generic name for all gelatin products."}
{"id": "44432", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44432", "title": "Sacred heart of Jesus", "text": ""}
{"id": "44434", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44434", "title": "Pteranodon", "text": "Pteranodon was a large pterosaur from the Upper Cretaceous period. About 1200 partial skeletons have been found, more than any other pterosaur. It lived in the area of the Western Interior Seaway.\nFossil \"Pteranodon\" have been found in Kansas, Alabama, Nebraska, Wyoming, and South Dakota.\nAppearance.\nWith its wings open it was up to 6.25 meters across. \"Pteranodon\" might have lived much like an albatross, spending a lot of time over the ocean, looking for fish. It had no teeth in its long mouth, and it had a small pouch like a pelican at the back of its jaw. \"Pteranodon\" had a big crest at the back of its head. \"Pteranodon longiceps\" had a straight crest that went backwards, and \"Pteranodon sternbergi\" had a bigger, flatter crest that went upward.\nLife style.\n\"Pteranodon\" lived mainly on offshore rookeries. Most \"Pteranodon\" fossils are found where, at the time, they were hundreds of kilometres from the coastline.\nThey certainly fed on fish. Fossilized fish bones have been found in the stomach area of one \"Pteranodon\". Other specimens have fragments of fish scales and vertebrae near the torso.\nFemales of both species were smaller than the males, and had small, rounded crests. The crests were probably used in display, though they may have had other functions as well."}
{"id": "44435", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44435", "title": "Richard II of England", "text": "Richard II (6 January 1367\u201314 February 1400) was the son of Edward, the Black Prince, Prince of Wales, and Joan of Kent, \"The Fair Maid of Kent\". He was born in Bordeaux, and became his father's successor when his elder brother died in infancy. His father died before him, so he became king in 1377. His uncle John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster became regent until Richard II could rule. He was deposed by Henry of Bolingbroke (Henry IV), John of Gaunt's son with Blanche of Lancaster, taken prisoner and later died in captivity.\nRichard abdicated (resigned) in 1399. He was murdered later that year."}
{"id": "44436", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44436", "title": "Drinker", "text": "Drinker was a small dinosaur from North America. It was a very small herbivore that grew up to 1 meter long. It was named after Edward Drinker Cope a paleontologist, a dinosaur scientist who found many dinosaur fossils such as \"Triceratops\", \"Anatotitan\" and \"Tyrannosaurus rex\"."}
{"id": "44437", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44437", "title": "Franz Ferdinand (band)", "text": "Franz Ferdinand is an indie rock band from Glasgow, Scotland. The group is named after Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria. Franz Ferdinand has released three albums, \"Franz Ferdinand\", \"You Could Have It So Much Better With Franz Ferdinand\", and their most recent release, \"Tonight: Franz Ferdinand\".\nThe band members are Alex Kapranos, Robert Hardy, Nicholas McCarthy, Paul Thomson."}
{"id": "44449", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44449", "title": "Kress Stores", "text": "S. H. Kress &amp; Co. was a group of \"five and dime\" department stores in the United States between 1896 to 1981. The business was started in Nanticoke, Pennsylvania, by Samuel H. Kress in 1896. Kress Stores were common in many cities and towns of the United States. In 1964, S. H. Kress &amp; Co. was bought by Genesco, Inc. Genesco began closing down the stores in 1980.\nThe Kress chain was known for the architecture of the stores. A number of former Kress stores, now used for other things, are said to be landmarks. Some of the most well-known Kress locations included New York City's Fifth Avenue, Canal Street, New Orleans, and one at Hollywood's Hollywood Boulevard. The one at Hollywood Boulevard is now preserved at a theme park in Florida."}
{"id": "44451", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44451", "title": "Henry V of England", "text": "Henry V (16 September 1386\u00a0\u2013 31 August 1422), was the King of England from 1413 to 1422. He was born at Monmouth, Wales. It is not known whether he was born on 9 August 1386 or 16 September 1387.\nHenry V was the son of Henry Bolingbroke, later Henry IV, and Mary de Bohun, who died before Bolingbroke became king.\nDuring his reign, Henry increased his power as King of England and also took the title of King of France, over which English kings had been fighting for decades. He defeated the French at the famous Battle of Agincourt in 1415. Shakespeare wrote a play about that and made him important in other plays. "}
{"id": "44454", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44454", "title": "Control", "text": ""}
{"id": "44457", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44457", "title": "Athlete's foot", "text": "Athlete's foot is a condition where the foot is dry and cracked, which can be mildly painful. It was named athlete's foot because it was common in people who play sports or do exercise. The infection can be spread to other areas of the body, such as the armpits, knees and elbows.\nSymptoms.\nAthlete's foot causes scaling, flaking, itching, blisters and cracked skin. It can be cured by using antibiotics."}
{"id": "44460", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44460", "title": "Back", "text": "The word back has several meanings."}
{"id": "44470", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44470", "title": "Reflection", "text": "Reflection is the change in direction of a wave at a boundary between two different media, so that the wave moves back into the medium it came from.\nThe most common examples include the reflection of light, sound and water waves.\nSpecular reflection is a mirror-like reflection of light from a surface, in which light from a single incoming direction is reflected into a single outgoing direction. In the diagram to the right, a light ray is coming from the point P, and meets at the mirror at point O. The ray reflects at the point O outwards in the same medium towards point Q. Reflection is measured relative to a line through point O that is at 90\u02da to the mirror. The angles made by the light ray (shown in the diagram as formula_1 and formula_2) must be equal. Both angles have to be equal whenever reflection occurs. This is known as the \"law of reflection\".\nPeople make many things to use reflections, including reflecting telescopes, radar, sonar, and lidar and putting light reflectors on things they want to see."}
{"id": "44471", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44471", "title": "King Harold", "text": ""}
{"id": "44491", "revid": "527152", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44491", "title": "Caspian Sea", "text": "The Caspian Sea is the largest lake on Earth by both area and volume. It has a surface area of . Its volume is . The Caspian has for 40 to 44% of the total lake waters of the world.\nThe Caspian sea is an endorheic body of water. It is bordered by Russia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan. It has a maximum depth of about . It is called a sea because when the Romans first arrived there, they tasted the water and found it to be salty. It has a salinity of approximately 1.2%, about a third the salinity of sea water."}
{"id": "44494", "revid": "7441190", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44494", "title": "Complementary angles", "text": "Complementary angles are two angles that when their measurements are added together is equal to 90 degrees."}
{"id": "44495", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44495", "title": "Civil rights", "text": "Civil rights are rights that all people in a country have. The civil rights of a country apply to all the citizens within its borders. These rights are given by the laws of the country. Civil rights are sometimes thought to be the same as natural rights.\nIn many countries civil rights include freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, and freedom of assembly. Civil rights also include the right to own property and the right to get fair and equal treatment from the government, from other citizens, and from private groups. They may prevent against discrimination based on race, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity and disability.\nCivil rights are protected by law and custom. The constitutions of many democracies have a \"Bill of Rights\" that describes the people's liberties and rights. A well-known example is the United States Bill of Rights. \nA court of law decides if a person's civil rights have been violated. The courts also decide the limits of civil rights, so that people do not use their freedoms to take away the rights of other people."}
{"id": "44500", "revid": "830159", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44500", "title": "Moscovium", "text": "Moscovium is a superheavy synthetic radioactive chemical element also known as eka-bismuth. It has the symbol Mc and the atomic number 115. Moscovium does not exist in nature. It is made from a fusion reaction between americium and calcium.\nThe element is named in honor of the Russian city of Moscow.\nMoscovium is in or near the center of the theoretical island of stability. No stable isotopes of moscovium have yet been found. The most stable isotope with 184 neutrons is 299Mc. The isotope that has been made has only 175 neutrons (290Mc).\nUses.\nThere is no use of Moscovium at the moment because of its radioactivity and the fact that it decays pretty quickly.\nHistory.\nOn February 2, 2004 a report that moscovium and nihonium were made was written in a journal named Physical Review C. The report was written by a team of Russian scientists at Dubna University's Joint Institute for Nuclear Research and American scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.,\nThese people reported that they bombarded americium with calcium to make four atoms of moscovium.\nScientists of Japan also report that they have made moscovium.\nIn May 2006 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research this element was made by another method and what the final products from radioactive decay were was found by chemical analysis.\nName.\nThe name was changed to Moscovium. It used to be named ununpentium.\nChemical properties.\nNot enough moscovium has been made to measure its physical or chemical properties. It is thought that it would be a hard metal. It may be slightly colored.\nMoscovium is in the same group as bismuth but its chemical properties will be different. The chemistry of ununpentium will be very influenced by special relativity. It will make its properties different to the other elements in the periodic table that have a smaller atomic number. One important difference from bismuth is the presence of a stable oxidation state of +I (Mc+). The (Mc+) ion is thought to have chemical properties like Tl+.\nIn popular culture.\nMoscovium is inside or near the island of stability. This is probably why it is found in popular culture. It is more likely to be talked about in UFO conspiracy theories. \nThe most popular story about moscovium is from Bob Lazar. It is not pseudoscience because it is a refutable theory, however Lazar's claims are not backed by any direct experimental evidence at this time."}
{"id": "44501", "revid": "830159", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44501", "title": "Tennessine", "text": "Tennessine (formerly Ununseptium meaning \"one-one-seven-ium\" in Latin) is a radioactive superheavy man-made chemical element. It has a symbol Ts and atomic number of 117. It is the second heaviest element of all, and is the second to last element. It is in group 17 in the periodic table, where the halogens are. Its properties are not yet fully known but it is probably a metalloid. The discovery of tennessine was announced in 2010 by scientists in Russia and the United States. They collaborated and it is the most recently discovered element as of 2019. It is named after the state of Tennessee and it has no uses except research. \nHistory.\nBefore discovery.\nIn 2004, the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) team in Dubna, Moscow Oblast, Russia planned an experiment to create element 117. To do this, they needed to fuse the elements berkelium (element 97) and calcium (element 20). However, the American team at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the only producer of berkelium in the world, had stopped making berkelium for a while. So, they created the element 118 first using californium (element 98) and calcium.\nThe Russian team wanted to use berkelium because the isotope of calcium used in the experiment, calcium-48, has 20 protons and 28 neutrons. This is the lightest stable or almost stable nucleus (the center of an atom) with much more neutrons than protons. Zinc-68 is the second-lightest nucleus of this kind, but it is heavier than calcium-48. Since tennessine has 117 protons, they need another atom with 97 protons to be combined with the calcium atom, and berkelium has 97 protons.\nIn the experiment, the berkelium is made into a target and the calcium is fired in the form of a beam to the berkelium target. The calcium beam is created in Russia by removing the small amount of calcium-48 from natural calcium using chemical means. The nuclei that is made after the experiment will be heavier and is nearer to the island of stability. This is the idea that some very heavy atoms can be quite stable. \nDiscovery of Tennessine.\nIn 2008, the American team started again to create berkelium, and they told the Russian team about it. The program made 22 milligrams of berkelium, and this is enough for the experiment. Soon after, the berkelium was cooled in 90 days and was made more pure by chemical means in 90 more days. The berkelium target had to be taken to Russia quickly because the half-life of the isotope of berkelium used, berkelium-249, is only 330 days. In other words, after 330 days, half of all the berkelium will no longer be berkelium. Actually, if the experiment did not start six months after the target was made, it would have been cancelled because they did not have enough berkelium for the experiment. In summer 2009, the target was packed into five lead containers and was sent by a commercial flight from New York to Moscow.\nBoth teams had to face the bureaucratic obstacle between America and Russia before they send the berkelium target to allow it to arrive in Russia on time. However, there were still problems: Russian customs did not let the berkelium target get into the country twice due to missing or incomplete paperwork. Even though the target went over the Atlantic Ocean five times, the whole journey only took a few days. When the target finally got into Moscow, it was sent to Dimitrovgrad, Ulyanovsk Oblask. Here, the target was placed on a thin titanium film (layer). This film was then sent to Dubna where it was placed inside the JINR particle accelerator. This particle accelerator is the most powerful particle accelerator in the world for the creation of superheavy elements.\nThe experiment began in June 2009. In January 2010, the scientists at the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions announced within the laboratory that they had found the decay of a new element with atomic number 117 through two decay chains. The odd-odd isotope does 6 alpha decays before doing a spontaneous (sudden) fission. The odd-even isotope does 3 alpha decays before fission. On 9 April 2010, an official report was released in the \"Physical Review Letters\" journal. It showed that the isotopes that were mentioned in the decay chains were 294Ts and 293Ts. The isotopes were made as follows:\nChemistry.\nThe chemistry of Tennessine is currently unknown. However, chemists can predict how the element would be like using chemistry from the other halogens. Tennessine is most likely supposed to be a member of group 17 in the periodic table, below the five halogens: fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine. Each of them has seven valence electrons. For tennessine, being in the seventh period (row) of the periodic table, going down the halogen group would predict a valence electron configuration of 7s27p5, and it would therefore be expected to behave kind of like to the halogens in many ways.\nUses.\nThere are no uses for Tennessine because of how short lived it is and its radioactivity."}
{"id": "44503", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44503", "title": "The World Factbook", "text": "The World Factbook, also known as the CIA World Factbook, is a book that contains the Central Intelligence Agency's information about the world's countries. A new book is published every year. The \"Factbook\" provides a two- to three-page summary of the demographics, geography, communications, government, economy, and military of 272 countries, dependencies, and other areas in the world.\n\"The World Factbook\" is designed to be used by people that work for the United States government, but it is also used by students, on websites, and in other publications that are not made by governments. Because the U.S. Government made it, it is in the public domain. "}
{"id": "44504", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44504", "title": "CIA World Factbook", "text": ""}
{"id": "44526", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44526", "title": "Taco", "text": "Tacos are Mexican sandwich-like dishes. It is made from a corn tortilla wrapped around some sort of filling. Traditionally, the tortilla is soft, but some variations from different countries have hard shells, as well as flour tortillas. \nTacos are filled with a variety of filling such as beef, chicken, fish, pork, cheese, lettuce, onions, guacamole, and salsa. Sauces can also be added to tacos ranging from salsa to hot sauces like Tapat\u00edo. People use many different combinations of foods to build the taco, so it is very versatile.\nTacos are world popular, but especially so in Mexico, China and the United States. In the United States, tacos have been industrialized by fast food businesses such as Taco Bell, Del Taco, and Chipotle."}
{"id": "44529", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44529", "title": "Gerard Way", "text": "Gerard Arthur Way (born April 9, 1977) is an American musician and comic book writer. Way is the lead singer and co-founder of the punk rock band My Chemical Romance. His brother Mikey was the bass player for the band. \nWay played for the band from their start in September 2001 until they broke up on March 22, 2013, as of October 31, 2019 as of the reunion, he is in the band. \nWay is known for commonly changing hair color from black to blonde and even a striking red. Gerard married Lyn Z of Mindless Self Indulgence on September 3, 2007. He and Lyn Z announced that they were having a baby in November 2008. Their daughter, Bandit Lee Way, was born on May 27, 2009. She arrived at 2:57 PM and weighed 6 pounds and 5.6 ounces. Gerard has said that both Bandit and Lyn Z are \"happy and healthy\". Way is also the writer of the comic book series \"The Umbrella Academy\".\nBefore My Chemical Romance.\nHe was born on April 9, 1977 in Summit, New Jersey. Way attended the School of Visual Arts in New York City and graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in 1999. "}
{"id": "44531", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44531", "title": "Vegetables", "text": ""}
{"id": "44533", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44533", "title": "Gerard arthur Way", "text": ""}
{"id": "44534", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44534", "title": "Gerard Arthur Way", "text": ""}
{"id": "44535", "revid": "7069619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44535", "title": "Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer", "text": "Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer were an English progressive rock group. In the 1970s, the band was extremely popular, selling over 30 million albums and headlining huge concerts."}
{"id": "44537", "revid": "7744236", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44537", "title": "Newark, New Jersey", "text": "Newark is the largest city in U.S. State of New Jersey, 65th largest city in the United States, and serves as the seat of Essex County. It is located 8 miles west of Manhattan.\nNewark was originally formed as a township on October 31, 1693. During its time as a township, portions were taken to form Springfield Township, New Jersey, Caldwell Township, New Jersey, Orange Township, New Jersey, Bloomfield Township, New Jersey, (March 23, 1812) and Clinton Township, New Jersey. Newark was reincorporated as a city on April 11, 1836. The previously independent Vailsburg borough was annexed by Newark on January 1, 1905 and became part of West Ward. \nNewark is divided into five wards; North Ward, South Ward, West Ward, East Ward, and Central Ward. Central Ward has train stations of Amtrak and New Jersey Transit. It also has museums and tall buildings including headquarters of large corporations. The High Street Historic District is in Central Ward.\nEast Ward includes a neighborhood called \"Ironbound\". South Ward has the large Newark Liberty International Airport, one of the first major airports in the United States. Branch Brook Park in North Ward has the biggest display of cherry blossoms in the eastern United States."}
{"id": "44538", "revid": "43983", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44538", "title": "Aeolic Greek", "text": "Aeolic Greek was a dialect of the Greek language that was spoken on the island of Lesbos and nearby parts of Asia Minor."}
{"id": "44539", "revid": "6807", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44539", "title": "Emerson Lake and Palmer", "text": ""}
{"id": "44540", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44540", "title": "Lesbian Greek", "text": ""}
{"id": "44542", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44542", "title": "Myst", "text": "Myst is a computer game designed by the brothers Robyn and Rand Miller in a company called Cyan. The Millers started working on Myst in 1991 and released it for the Macintosh computer on September 24, 1993. \"Myst\" was later released on many different computers and video game consoles.\nIn \"Myst\", the player starts by using a special book to travel to Myst Island. There, the player uses other special books to travel to different worlds called \"Ages\". Solving puzzles on different Ages helps the player learn more about Myst Island and the people who live there. The player can make choices that change the ending of the game.\nWhen \"Myst\" was released, it became very popular. Critics loved \"Myst\" because it felt like a real world. \"Myst\" was the best-selling computer game until The Sims was released in 2002. \"Myst\" helped the CD-ROM get more popular when the CD-ROM was new. Because \"Myst\" was so popular, four sequels were made, and three \"Myst\" novels were written."}
{"id": "44545", "revid": "495963", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44545", "title": "Father Christmas", "text": "Father Christmas is the British name for Santa Claus. The name was used in songs, such as \"I Believe in Father Christmas\" by Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer."}
{"id": "44546", "revid": "178407", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44546", "title": "Wham!", "text": "Wham! was an English pop band. It was created in 1981 by George Michael and Andrew Ridgeley. They released their first single in 1982. For a short time, they were known in the United States as Wham! UK because another band already had that name. They are best known for the songs \"Last Christmas\" and \"Wake Me Up Before You Go-Go\"."}
{"id": "44547", "revid": "7823656", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44547", "title": "George Michael", "text": "Georgios Kyriacos Panayiotou, (25 June 1963 \u2013 25 December 2016), known professionally as George Michael, was an English singer-songwriter, and record producer.\nCareer.\nGeorge Michael who rose to fame in the 1980s, when he formed the pop duo Wham! with his school friend Andrew Ridgeley. The duo released a string of massive singles in 1982 like \"Young Guns (Go For It)\" and \"Wham Rap! (Enjoy What You Do),\" both written by Michael. In 1983, Wham\u2019s debut album, \"Fantastic\" was released. It reached #1 in the UK charts and had the hit single \"Club Tropicana\" with a music video, shot in Ibiza. After a year, Wham changed its image with the release of their second album Make it Big, which was a critical and commercial success, hitting #1 in both the UK and the USA. It produced four singles, all topping the charts on both sides of the Atlantic. One of the most popular songs in the album, \"Careless Whisper,\" Michael's first solo single, was released in 1984 while he was still performing with Wham!. In 1986, Wham! disbanded after release of a third studio album, single and concert at Wembley Stadium.\nFollowing his split with Wham!, George Michael began a successful solo career, releasing four studio albums, \"Faith\" (1987), \"Listen Without Prejudice Vol. 1\" (1991), \"Older\" (1996), and \"Patience\" (2004). Michael has sold over 100 million records worldwide as of 2010, encompassing 11 British #1 singles, 9 British #1 albums, 10 US #1 singles, and 2 US #1 album. His 1987 debut solo album, \"Faith\" has sold over 20\u00a0million copies worldwide alone and its considered by some music critics to be one of the greatest albums in pop music history. In 2004, Radio Academy has named Michael the most played artist on British radio between the period of 1984-2004.\nIn 2006, George Michael announced his first tour in 15 years. 25 Live tour was a massive, worldwide undertaking by Michael that spanned forth individual tours over the course of five years (2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010).\nCharity.\nIn November 1984, Michael joined other popular British and Irish pop stars to form Band Aid, singing on the charity song \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\" for relief of famine in Ethiopia. This single became the UK Christmas number one on the UK Singles Chart in December 1984. Michael's own song, \"Last Christmas\" by Wham!, was held at number two. \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\" sold 3.75\u00a0million copies in the UK. It became the biggest selling single in UK Chart history. It held this position until 1997 when it was overtaken by Elton John's \"Candle in the Wind 1997\", released in tribute to Princess Diana following her death Michael also attended Diana's funeral with Elton John. Michael donated the royalties from \"Last Christmas\" to Band Aid and subsequently sang with Elton John at Live Aid (the Band Aid charity concert) in 1985.\nPersonal life.\nMichael was born in London to an English mother and Greek father. Michael was raised there and in Hertfordshire. He was initially private about being homosexual. During his \"Wham!\" career, he was in relationships with well-known women such as actress Brooke Shields, and model Pat Fernandes. Between 1986-1988, he was romantically involved with Kathy Yueng, an American makeup artist who was featured in \"I Want Your Sex\" Music Video. Nonetheless, his sexual orientation was well known among London music business people.\nThese persisted into his solo career, but Michael had already established a relationship with Anselmo Feleppa, whom he had met at the 1991 concert \"Rock in Rio\". Feleppa died of an AIDS-related brain hemorrhage in 1993. Michael's single \"Jesus to a Child\" is a tribute to Feleppa: (he consistently dedicates it to him before performing it live), as is his 1996 album \"Older\". Since 1996, Michael has been in a long-term relationship with businessman Kenny Goss. They have homes in London and Dallas.\nDeath.\nOn 25 December 2016 before 17:24 GMT, Michael died at his property in Goring, Oxfordshire, England from heart failure and a fatty liver, aged 54. Before 22:59 GMT his publicist stated that he had \"passed away peacefully\" and Thames Valley Police said they were treating the death as unexplained and there were no suspicious circumstances. South Central Ambulance Service had attended his property at 13:42 GMT on Christmas Day.\nDiscography.\nTwenty Five (2006).\nDisc 1\nDisc 2\nDisc 3"}
{"id": "44550", "revid": "10700", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44550", "title": "Chink", "text": "Chink is a pejorative term for Chinese people.\nChink may also refer to:"}
{"id": "44553", "revid": "294863", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44553", "title": "Handle", "text": "Handle could mean:"}
{"id": "44556", "revid": "4773800", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44556", "title": "Spermicide", "text": "Spermicide is a substance that kills sperm before it can enter the vagina. When a spermicide is used as the only form of contraception, the pregnancy rate is much higher than it is when other contraceptives are used. Spermicides are normally used with barrier contraception, such as condoms, cervical caps, diaphragms, and contraceptive sponges."}
{"id": "44557", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44557", "title": "Big Brother (TV series)", "text": "Big Brother is a TV reality show. People known as housemates, enter a house and they do not bring any of their belongings except clothes. They are bored and the people behind the cameras who call themselves Big Brother announce things through the loudspeaker. Housemates would get a task to do so that they can get food. There is also a celebrity version of Big Brother.\nBig Brother around the world.\nThe series was developed by Endemol, and the first season was shown in the Netherlands. The show's format has since been copied in over forty countries, including Brazil, Bulgaria, Germany, Italy, Spain, India, United Kingdom and US. It also used to be in Australia, It was originally cancelled in 2008, later came back in 2012-2014 and will return again in 2020\nSpecial editions.\nIn some countries, there are also special editions of the show, for example \"Big Brother VIP\" or \"\". \nUsually, some of the rules in these special editions are a little bit different from the original ones.\n\"Big Brother VIP\" / \"Celebrity Big Brother\".\n\"Big Brother VIP\" is the name of the special edition of the show, in which all the housemates are famous people. It has been released in many of the countries airing \"Big Brother\", for example Bulgaria - \"VIP Brother\"; Mexico - \"Big Brother VIP\"; UK - \"Celebrity Big Brother\". \nThe duration of the show is often only a month and in some countries the nominations and evictions are twice a week. \nSometimes the big prize is given for charity or there is no big prize at all.\n\"Big Brother\" series.\n&lt;section begin=\"Big Brother series\" /&gt;, \"Big Brother\" has produced 506 winners in over 55 franchises.\n&lt;section end=\"Big Brother series\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44558", "revid": "313141", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44558", "title": "Euphonium", "text": "The euphonium is a brass instrument. It is very similar to the baritone horn, but it is different because the tubes are wider and it is bigger. The euphonium makes low sounds, similar to the trombone. The euphonium has 3 or 4 valves and 1-3 spit valves. \"Spit\" valves do not really mean there is spit in the instrument, it means that there is condensation in the instrument.\nThe euphonium is seen in different sorts of bands in Europe and America. The musicians make the sound by blowing into the instrument and \"buzzing\" with their lips. \nThe word euphonium means: \"producing nice sounds\" \nEuphoniums are basically silver and brass in colour. "}
{"id": "44563", "revid": "4794266", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44563", "title": "Newark", "text": "Newark can refer to:"}
{"id": "44571", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44571", "title": "Blogger", "text": "A blogger is a person who keeps a blog as a major activity in their life. This is a diary or journal on the web (also known as 'weblog'). Blogs are usually free to read, but nevertheless some have made fame and fortune for their writing. Tavi Gevinson's blog is an example. Many politicians and journalists are bloggers, perhaps realising that this is one good way to contact the younger voters. Michelle Malkin's blog is an example of this kind of use.\nTwitter and Facebook are networking sites which offer some of the functions of a blog. What a blogger can do on sites like that is limited by the proprietary software. The really professional bloggers have their own sites, and also hold pages on social networking sites. Blogger is a google platefrom use for make free website. "}
{"id": "44584", "revid": "3243", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44584", "title": "Prophylaxis", "text": "Prophylaxis is a Greek word and concept. It means any \"action taken to guard or prevent beforehand\". The corresponding adjective is prophylactic.\nTwo parts.\nThe concept of prophylaxis has two parts. First is forethought. A person has to realise the need first of all. Second is taking appropriate action.\nAny failure of prophylaxis is a failure at either stage 1 or stage 2. Successful prophylaxis means one has anticipated and avoided some undesirable outcome.\nExamples.\nPreventative medicine.\nProphylaxis is the central idea in preventative medicine. People usually think medical treatment helps sick people to get healthy. Prophylactic treatment is helpful in a different way. Primary prophylaxis tries to stop healthy people from getting sick. Secondary prophylaxis tries to stop people who are sick from getting worse.\nBirth control.\nProphylaxis may also be used as a synonym for birth control. Condoms are prophylactic, because when used properly they can prevent pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases. In the strict meaning and medical meaning of the word \"profylaxe\", it only means prevention of DISEASE, not of birth. For example, oral contraceptive is not a profylaxe, because it does not prevent disease."}
{"id": "44585", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44585", "title": "Prophylactic", "text": ""}
{"id": "44586", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44586", "title": "Medical", "text": ""}
{"id": "44587", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44587", "title": "Human immunodeficiency virus", "text": ""}
{"id": "44588", "revid": "1033514", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44588", "title": "Abu Bakr", "text": "Ab\u016b Bakr \u2018Abdall\u0101h bin Ab\u012b Qu\u1e25\u0101fah a\u1e63-\u1e62idd\u012bq (; (573 CE 22 August 634 CE) popularly known as Abu Bakr (), was a senior companion and\u2014through his daughter Aisha\u2014the father-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. Abu Bakr became the first openly declared Muslim outside Muhammad's family. Abu Bakr served as a trusted advisor to Muhammad. During Muhammad's lifetime, he was involved in several campaigns and treaties.\nHe ruled over the Rashidun Caliphate from 632 to 634 CE when he became the first Muslim Caliph following Muhammad's death. As caliph, Abu Bakr succeeded to the political and administrative functions previously exercised by Muhammad. He was commonly known as The Truthful Caliph (, \"\"). Abu Bakr's reign lasted for 2 years, 3 months and 11 days ending with his death after an illness. He ruled over the Rashidun Caliphate from 632 to 634 CE when he became the first Muslim Caliph following Muhammad's death.\nEarly life.\nAbu Bakr's full name was Abd Allah ibn 'Uthman ibn Aamir ibn Amr ibn Ka'ab ibn Sa'ad ibn Taym (from whom the at-Taymi al-Quraishi) ibn Murrah ibn Ka'ab ibn Lu'ai ibn Ghalib ibn Fihr al-Quraishi.\nIn Arabic, the name \"Abd Allah\" means \"slave of Allah\". One of his early titles, preceding his conversion to Islam, was \"atiqe\", \"the saved one\". Muhammad later reaffirmed this title when he said that Abu Bakr is the \"atiqe\" (the one saved from hell fire by God). He was called \"Al-Siddiq\" (the truthful) by Muhammad after he believed him in the event of Isra and Mi'raj when other people didn't, and Ali confirmed that title several times.\nThere is a dispute over his name being Abdullah. Ibn Hajar in \"Al-Isaabah\", and many other narrations, narrates from Qasim Ibn Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr, \"I asked Ayesha the name of Abu Bakr. She said Abdullah. I said people are saying Ateeq. She said Abu Quhafa had three children, one was Ateeq, second Mu\u2019taq and third, Otaiq. All three names are similar and derived from the same root.\"\nHe was mentioned in the Quran as the \"second of the two who lay in the cave\" in reference to the event of hijra, where with Muhammad he hid in the cave in Jabal Thawr from the Meccan search party that was sent after them, thus being one of few who were given direct mention in the Quran.\nImam Jafar al Sadiq famously narrated how the title \"Siddiq\" was given to Abu Bakr from Muhammad. Jafar was a direct descendant of Abu Bakr from his maternal side, as well as being a descendant of Ali from his father's side. Jafar al-Sadiq was also the successor of the Naqshbandi Sufi order believed to be originating from Abu Bakr himself. Imam Muhammad al Baqir, the father of Imam Jafar Sadiq, also called Abu Bakr with the title Siddiq.\nMuch of the available knowledge about Muhammad comes through Abu Bakr's daughter, Aisha. After the death of Abu Bakr, her brother Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr was raised by Ali. After Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr was killed by the Umayyads, Aisha raised and taught her nephew Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr. Aisha also taught another nephew Urwah ibn Zubayr. He then taught his son Hisham ibn Urwah, who was the main teacher of Malik ibn Anas] whose views many Sunni follow.\nQasim's mother was of \u2018Ali's family and his daughter Farwah bint al-Qasim, who married Muhammad al-Baqir, was the mother of Jafar al-Sadiq. Therefore al-Qasim was the grandson of the first caliph Abu Bakr and the grandfather of Ja'far al-Sadiq.\nAnother of Abu Bakr's grandsons, Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, was very close to Husayn bin Ali. After Hussein ibn Ali was betrayed by the people of Kufa and killed by the Yazid I Army of the, Umayyads ruler, Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr confronted Yazid and expelled him from Iraq, southern Arabia and the greater part of Syria, and parts of Egypt. Following a lengthy campaign, on his last hour Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr asked his mother Asma' bint Abu Bakr, the daughter of the first caliph, for advice. Asma' bint Abu Bakr replied to her son:\n\"You know better in your own self, that if you are upon the truth and you are calling towards the truth go forth, for people more honourable than you have been killed and if you are not upon the truth, then what an evil son you are and you have destroyed yourself and those who are with you. If you say, that if you are upon the truth and you will be killed at the hands of others, then you will not truly be free\". Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr left and was later also killed and the army now under the control of the Umayyads."}
{"id": "44590", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44590", "title": "Lemon", "text": "The lemon is a small tree (\"Citrus limon\") that is green even in the winter. It came from Asia. 'Lemon' is also the name of the tree's oval-shaped yellow fruit. The fruit is used for cooking and other things in the world \u2013 usually for its juice.\nPeople do not know for sure where lemons have come from. However, most people think that lemons first grew in India, northern Burma, and China. The lemon is the common name for \"Citrus limon.\" A lemon is a yellow citrus fruit. It is related to the orange. Lemon juice is about 5% citric acid, and has a pH of 2 to 3. Lemon plants vary in size yet stay generally small. The tallest height they can get is about 6 meters tall.\nLemons taste sour. The juice, zest, and pulp are often used in cooking, often on fish and other meat for better taste. Lemon is also used to flavour drinks, such as lemonade or soft drinks."}
{"id": "44591", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44591", "title": "Citrus fruit", "text": ""}
{"id": "44592", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44592", "title": "Seeds", "text": ""}
{"id": "44593", "revid": "7612615", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44593", "title": "Elevator", "text": "An elevator or lift is a vertical transport vehicle that efficiently moves people or goods between floors of a building. They are generally powered by electric motors that either drive traction cables and counterweight systems, or pump hydraulic fluid to raise a cylindrical piston.\nLanguages other than English may have loanwords based on either elevator (e.g., Japanese) or lift (e.g., Cantonese).\nBecause of wheelchair access laws, elevators are often a legal requirement in new multi-story buildings, especially where wheelchair ramps would be impractical.\nDesign.\nSome argue that lifts began as simple rope or chain hoists. A lift is essentially a platform that is either pulled or pushed up by a mechanical means. A modern-day lift consists of a cab (also called a \"cage\" or \"car\") mounted on a platform within an enclosed space called a shaft or sometimes a \"hoistway\". In the past, lift drive mechanisms were powered by steam and water hydraulic pistons. In a \"traction\" lift, cars are pulled up by means of rolling steel ropes over a deeply grooved pulley, commonly called a sheave in the industry. The weight of the car is balanced with a counterweight. Sometimes two lifts always move synchronously in opposite directions, and they are each other's counterweight\nThe friction between the ropes and the pulley furnishes the traction which gives this type of lift its name.\nHydraulic lifts use the principles of hydraulics (in the sense of hydraulic power) to pressurize an above ground or in-ground piston to raise and lower the car. Roped hydraulics use a combination of both ropes and hydraulic power to raise and lower cars. Recent innovations include permanent earth magnet motors, machine room-less rail mounted gearless machines, and microprocessor controls.\nThe technology used in new installations depends on a variety of factors. Hydraulic lifts are cheaper, but installing cylinders greater than a certain length becomes impractical for very high lift hoistways. For buildings of much over seven stories, traction lifts must be employed instead. Hydraulic lifts are usually slower than traction lifts.\nLifts are a candidate for mass customization.\nThere are economies to be made from mass production of the components, but each building comes with its own requirements like different number of floors, dimensions of the well and usage patterns.\nElevator doors.\nElevator doors protect riders from being crushed in between the cab and the floor. The most common configuration is to have two panels that meet in the middle, and slide open laterally. In a cascading configuration (potentially allowing wider entryways within limited space), the doors run on independent tracks so that while open, they are tucked behind one another, and while closed, they form cascading layers on one side. This can configured so that two sets of such cascading doors operate like the center opening doors described above, allowing for a very wide elevator cab. In less expensive installations the elevator can also use one large \"slab\" door: a single panel door the width of the doorway that opens to the left or right laterally.\nMachine Room-Less (MRL).\nGeneral\nAll elevators, whether traction or hydraulic, require a machine room to store large electric motors (or hydraulic pumps) and a controller cabinet. This room is located above or below the hoistway (or only below, for hydraulic elevators) and may contain machinery for a single or a group of elevators. Modern day traction motors boasting gearless and permanent magnet drive can be more compact and efficient; electronic microprocessors have replaced the mechanical relays. As a result, traction elevators can be built without a dedicated room above the shaft, saving valuable space in building planning.\nThe new lift design presents a departure from the traditional, looped over-the-top traction rope routing of traction elevators. The ends of the cables are fixed to the supporting structure, and the length of the cable are connected to the car and counterweight by means of a force-multiplying, energy saving compound pulley system. Machine room-less elevators have become a welcome alternative to the older hydraulic elevator for low to medium rise buildings.\nKone, a Finnish elevator company, first developed the machine room-less elevator in 1996.\nBenefits from a Green Perspective\n---this takes away the environmental concern that was created by the hydraulic cylinder being stored underground\nOther Benefits\nFacts\n---national and local building codes did not address elevators without machine rooms\nHistory.\nThe first reference to an elevator is in the works of the Roman architect Vitruvius, who reported that Archimedes built his first elevator, probably in 236 B.C. In some literary sources of later historical periods, elevators were mentioned as cabs on a hemp rope and powered by hand or by animals. It is supposed that elevators of this type were installed in the Sinai monastery of Egypt. In the 17th century the prototypes of elevators were located in the palace buildings of England and France.\nIn 1852, Elisha Otis introduced the safety elevator, which prevented the fall of the cab if the cable broke. The design of the Otis safety elevator is somewhat similar to one type still used today. A governor device engages knurled roller(s), locking the elevator to its guides should the elevator move at an excessive speed. He demonstrated it at the New York exposition in the Crystal Palace in 1854.\nIn 1874, J.W. Meaker patented a method which permitted elevator doors to open and close safely.\nThe first electric elevator was constructed by the German engineer Werner von Siemens in 1880.\nIn 1882, when hydraulic power was a well established technology, a company later named the London Hydraulic Power Company was formed. It constructed a network of high pressure mains on both sides of the Thames which, ultimately, extended to 184 miles and powered some 8,000 machines, predominantly lifts (elevators) and cranes.\nIn 1929, Clarence Conrad Crispen, with Inclinator Company of America, created the first residential elevator. Crispen also invented the first inclined stairlift.http://inclinator.com/about-inclinator.asp\nElevator safety.\nPneumatic Vacuum Elevators.\nPneumatic or \"Vacuum\" elevators operate without cables and can be installed more easily and quickly than their alternatives since their housing comprises prefabricated sections which are considerably narrower than conventional lift shafts. These sections are often transparent and afford the passenger a near 360\u00b0 view.\nCable-borne elevators.\nStatistically speaking, elevators are extremely safe. Their safety record is unsurpassed by any other vehicle system. In 1998, it was estimated that approximately eight 100-millionths of one percent (1 in 12 million) of elevator rides resulted in an anomaly, and the vast majority of these were minor things such as the doors failing to open. For all practical purposes, there are no cases of elevators simply free-falling and killing the passengers inside; of the 20 to 30 elevator-related deaths each year, most of them are maintenance-related - for example, technicians leaning too far into the shaft or getting caught between moving parts, and most of the rest are attributed to easily avoidable accidents, such as people stepping blindly through doors that open into empty shafts or being strangled by scarves caught in the doors. In fact, prior to the September 11th terrorist attacks, the only known free-fall incident in a modern cable-borne elevator happened in 1945 when a B-25 bomber struck the Empire State Building in fog, severing the cables of an elevator cab, which fell from the 75th floor all the way to the bottom of the building, seriously injuring (though not killing) the sole occupant - the female elevator operator. While it is possible (though extraordinarily unlikely) for an elevator's cable to snap, all elevators in the modern era have been fitted with several safety devices which prevent the elevator from simply free-falling and crashing. An elevator cab is typically borne by six or eight hoist cables, each of which is capable on its own of supporting the full load of the elevator plus twenty-five per cent more weight. In addition, there is a device which detects whether the elevator is moving faster than its maximum designed speed; if this happens, the device causes bronze brake shoes to clamp down along the vertical rails in the shaft, stopping the elevator quickly, but not so abruptly as to cause injury. In addition, a hydraulic buffer is installed at the bottom of the shaft to cushion any impact somewhat.\nMost recently, there was an incident in a modern cable-borne elevator that took place in a children's hospital in Seattle, Washington on October 9, 2007. The elevator involved was a ThyssenKrupp ISIS machine room-less elevator; The ISIS used Kevlar fiberglass ropes instead of conventional braided-steel ropes all other traction elevators use. One of the ISIS elevators broke free from its cables, slipping between the 6th and 4th floors; the Kevlar ropes were the cause of this incident. After the incident, ThyssenKrupp discontinued production of the ISIS and, the following year, replaced it with the Synergy machine room-less elevator, which uses conventional braided-steel ropes, making it much safer.\nHydraulic elevators.\nPast problems with early hydraulic elevators meant those built prior to a code change in 1972 were subject to possible catastrophic failure. The code had previously required only single-bottom hydraulic cylinders. In the event of a cylinder breach, an uncontrolled fall of the elevator might result. Because it is impossible to verify the system completely without a pressurized casing (as described below), it is necessary to remove the piston to inspect it. The cost of removing the piston is such that it makes no economic sense to re-install the old cylinder; therefore it is necessary to replace the cylinder and install a new piston. Another solution to protect against a cylinder blowout is to install a \"life jacket.\" This is a device which, in the event of an excessive downward speed, clamps onto the cylinder and stops the car. This device is also known as a Rupture Valve in some parts of the world.\nIn addition to the safety concerns for older hydraulic elevators, there is risk of leaking hydraulic oil into the aquifer and causing potential environmental contamination. This has led to the introduction of PVC liners (casings) around hydraulic cylinders which can be monitored for integrity.\nIn the past decade, recent innovations in inverted hydraulic jacks have eliminated the costly process of drilling the ground to install a borehole jack. This also eliminates the threat of corrosion to the system and increases safety.\nTypes of hoist mechanisms.\nThere are at least four means of moving an elevator:\nTraction elevators.\nGeared traction machines are driven by AC or DC electric motors. Geared machines use worm gears to control mechanical movement of elevator cars by \"rolling\" steel hoist ropes over a drive sheave which is attached to a gearbox driven by a high speed motor. These machines are generally the best option for basement or overhead traction use for speeds up to 500\u00a0ft/min (2.5\u00a0m/s).\nGearless traction machines are low speed (low RPM), high torque electric motors powered either by AC or DC. In this case, the drive sheave is directly attached to the end of the motor. Gearless traction elevators can reach speeds of up to 2,000\u00a0ft/min (10\u00a0m/s), or even higher. A brake is mounted between the motor and drive sheave (or gearbox) to hold the elevator stationary at a floor. This brake is usually an external drum type and is actuated by spring force and held open electrically; a power failure will cause the brake to engage and prevent the elevator from falling (see inherent safety and safety engineering).\nIn each case, cables are attached to a hitch plate on top of the cab or may be \"underslung\" below a cab, and then looped over the drive sheave to a counterweight attached to the opposite end of the cables which reduces the amount of power needed to move the cab. The counterweight is located in the hoist-way and rides a separate rail system; as the car goes up, the counterweight goes down, and vice versa. This action is powered by the traction machine which is directed by the controller, typically a relay logic or computerized device that directs starting, acceleration, deceleration and stopping of the elevator cab. The weight of the counterweight is typically equal to the weight of the elevator cab plus 40-50% of the capacity of the elevator. The grooves in the drive sheave are specially designed to prevent the cables from slipping. \"Traction\" is provided to the ropes by the grip of the grooves in the sheave, thereby the name. As the ropes age and the traction grooves wear, some traction is lost and the ropes must be replaced and the sheave repaired or replaced.\nElevators with more than 100' (30 m) of travel have a system called compensation. This is a separate set of cables or a chain attached to the bottom of the counterweight and the bottom of the elevator cab. This makes it easier to control the elevator, as it compensates for the differing weight of cable between the hoist and the cab. If the elevator cab is at the top of the hoist-way, there is a short length of hoist cable above the car and a long length of compensating cable below the car and vice versa for the counterweight. If the compensation system uses cables, there will be an additional sheave in the pit below the elevator, to guide the cables. If the compensation system uses chains, the chain is guided by a bar mounted between the counterweight rails.\nClimbing elevator.\nA climbing elevator is a self-ascending elevator with its own propulsion. The propulsion can be done by an electric or a combustion engine. Climbing elevators are used in guyed masts or towers, in order to make easy access to parts of these constructions, such as flight safety lamps for maintenance. An example would be the Moonlight Towers in Austin, Texas, where the elevator holds only one person and equipment for maintenance.\nEmergency power operation (EPR).\nMany elevator installations now feature emergency power systems which allow elevator use in blackout situations and prevent people from becoming trapped in elevators.\nTraction elevators.\nWhen power is lost in a traction elevator system, all elevators will initially come to a halt. One by one, each car in the group will return to the lobby floor, open its doors and shut down. People in the remaining elevators may see an indicator light or hear a voice announcement informing them that the elevator will return to the lobby shortly. Once all cars have successfully returned, the system will then automatically select one or more cars to be used for normal operations and these cars will return to service. The car(s) selected to run under emergency power can be manually overridden by a key or strip switch in the lobby. In order to help prevent entrapment, when the system detects that it is running low on power, it will bring the running cars to the lobby or nearest floor, open the doors and shut down.\nHydraulic elevators.\nIn hydraulic elevator systems, emergency power will lower the elevators to the lowest landing and open the doors to allow passengers to exit. The doors then close after an adjustable time period and the car remains unusable until reset, usually by cycling the elevator main power switch. Typically, due to the high current draw when starting the pump motor, hydraulic elevators are not run using standard emergency power systems. Buildings like hospitals and nursing homes usually size their emergency generators to accommodate this draw. However, the increasing use of current limiting motor starters, commonly known as \"Soft-Start\" contactors, avoid much of this problem and the current draw of the pump motor is less of a limiting concern.\nElevator convenience features.\nElevators may feature talking devices as an accessibility aid for the blind. In addition to floor arrival notifications, the computer announces the direction of travel, and notifies the passengers before the doors are to close.\nIn addition to the call buttons, elevators usually have floor indicators (often illuminated by LED) and direction lanterns. The former are almost universal in cab interiors with more than two stops and may be found outside the elevators as well on one or more of the floors. Floor indicators can consist of a dial with a rotating needle, but the most common types are those with successively illuminated floor indications or LCDs. Likewise, a change of floors or an arrival at a floor is indicated by a sound, depending on the elevator.\nDirection lanterns are also found both inside and outside elevator cars, but they should always be visible from outside because their primary purpose is to help people decide whether or not to get on the elevator. If somebody waiting for the elevator wants to go up, but a car comes first that indicates that it is going down, then the person may decide not to get on the elevator. If the person waits, then one will still stop going up. Direction indicators are sometimes etched with arrows or shaped like arrows and/or use the convention that one that lights up red means \"down\" and green means \"up\". Since the color convention is often undermined or overrided by systems that do not invoke it, it is usually used only in conjunction with other differentiating factors. An example of a place whose elevators use only the color convention to differentiate between directions is the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago, where a single circle can be made to light up green for \"up\" and red for \"down.\" Sometimes directions must be inferred by the position of the indicators relative to one another.\nIn addition to lanterns, most elevators have a chime to indicate if the elevator is going up or down either before or after the doors open, usually in conjunction with the lanterns lighting up. Universally, one chime is for up, two is for down, and none indicates an elevator that is 'free'.\nObservatory service elevators often convey other facts of interest, including elevator speed, stopwatch, and current position (altitude), as with the case for Taipei 101's service elevators.\nStandards.\nThe mechanical and electrical design of elevators is dictated according to various standards (aka elevator codes), which may be international, national, state, regional or city based. Whereas once many standards were prescriptive, specifying exact criteria which must be complied with, there has recently been a shift towards more performance-based standards where the onus falls on the designer to ensure that the elevator meets or exceeds the standard..\nSome of the national elevator standards include:\nBecause an elevator is part of a building, it must also comply with standards relating to earthquake resilience, fire standards, electrical wiring rules and so forth.\nThe American National Elevator Standards Group (ANESG) sets an elevator weight standard to be 2200\u00a0lbs.\nAdditional requirements relating to access by disabled persons, may be mandated by laws or regulations such as the Americans with Disabilities Act."}
{"id": "44594", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44594", "title": "Lift", "text": ""}
{"id": "44596", "revid": "744335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44596", "title": "Billy Bragg", "text": "Stephen William Bragg (born 20 December 1957), known as Billy Bragg, is an English singer and guitarist. He was born in Barking, Essex. He is famous for his mix of folk, punk, and protest music."}
{"id": "44598", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44598", "title": "Brixton riots", "text": "There have been three riots in Brixton, London:"}
{"id": "44601", "revid": "6817", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44601", "title": "Riven", "text": ""}
{"id": "44607", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44607", "title": "Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)", "text": "Budweiser is a popular American beer made by the Anheuser-Busch company. It is made with hops, barley, and rice. It is known as the \"King of Beers\". It is brewed in St. Louis and other cities around the United States. There are several different types of Budweiser beer, such as Bud Light.\nThe name is similar to a Czech beer of the same name, Budweiser Budvar. They are currently the official beer sponsor of Fantasy Premier League."}
{"id": "44610", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44610", "title": "Shia Islam", "text": "Shi'a Islam (, ) is the second largest branch of Islam. Shia Muslims believe that Prophet Muhammad under the command of God chose Ali as Caliph (or Successor) and publicly declared it, in his last sermon after Hajj at Ghadeer Khumm. Shi'a Muslims believe in the teachings of the Qu'ran and the Prophet Muhammad's family, whom they call the Ahl al-Bayt. The Shias think that the first three ruling Sunni Caliphs had no importance to the development of the faith. The singular/adjective form is \"Sh\u012b'\u012b \" () and means a follower. \nShi'a Islam, like Sunni Islam, has at times been divided into many branches, however only three of these have a significant number of followers nowadays. The best known and the one with most adherents is Twelvers (\"Ithn\u0101 'ashariyya\"), followed by the Ismaili and Zaidiyyah."}
{"id": "44611", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44611", "title": "Brixton riot (1981)", "text": "The Brixton riot of 11 April 1981 was the biggest of three riots in Brixton, London, and the biggest riot in London.\nBrixton before the riots.\nBrixton in south London was a very poor inner-city area with many problems \u2014 high unemployment, much crime, bad housing. Many black people, mostly of Caribbean origin, lived there. Many people there disliked the police. \nThe evening of April 10.\nThe riot was unplanned. On the evening of the 10th, at around 5.15pm, a black boy with a knife wound was stopped by police. As he was brought to a police car by two policemen along Railton Road a large crowd attacked the police and the fight only ended when more policemen arrived; the youth was taken to hospital.\nThe night of April 10 and 11.\nThrough the night of the 10th and on the 11th the police brought many officers into the area. Throughout the day crowds slowly got together. In early evening, as the police tried to make some arrests on Atlantic Road, the riots started: a few bricks were thrown and windows smashed. More police came and more things were thrown. The police retreated, leaving their cars to be burned. Other cars were burned and things were stolen from shops on Railton Road, Mayall Road, Leeson Road and Brixton Road before the police came back.\nThe police closed the Atlantic-Railton-Mayall area to the public, although many other streets had groups of rioting people as well. The rioters started throwing with bricks, bottles, and Molotov cocktails. Cars and buildings were burned and fire engines attacked as they tried to stop the flames.\nThe riot was at its peak at around 8pm, with two public houses, schools and other buildings burning. Two hours later the police had the area under some control, although the fire brigade returned at the next morning only. By 1am the area was largely under control, with no large crowds \u2013 except the police \u2013 on the streets. There were tries to start violence again on the 12th, but they were stopped by more than 1,000 police on the streets.\nAfter the riots.\nThe riot was followed by almost 300 police injuries and 65 bad civilian injuries; over 100 cars were burned, including 56 police cars; almost 150 buildings were damaged, with thirty burned. There were 82 arrests.\nBetween 3 and 11 July of that year, there were more riots in England. There were riots in Handsworth, Southall, Toxteth, and Moss Side. There were also smaller pockets of unrest in Leeds, Leicester, Southampton, Halifax, Bedford, Gloucester, Coventry, Bristol, and Edinburgh.\nBrixton riots in the media.\nThe riots inspired the Eddy Grant song, \"Electric Avenue.\" \nThe Clash also made a song about Brixton, \"The Guns of Brixton.\" This song came out before the riots of 1981 (The album was sold first in 1979), but it describes the general atmosphere in the area."}
{"id": "44612", "revid": "5400", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44612", "title": "Sunni", "text": ""}
{"id": "44613", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44613", "title": "Shi'a", "text": ""}
{"id": "44614", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44614", "title": "Brixton riot", "text": ""}
{"id": "44617", "revid": "35925", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44617", "title": "Caudipteryx", "text": "Caudipteryx was a small feathered dinosaur. It was related to \"Oviraptor\" but looked more like \"Archaeopteryx\". It was a relative of \"Protarchaeopteryx\". It was found in China. It was a small insectivore, with long thin legs, less than a metre long. It had a fan of tail feathers and a fringe of feathers along the trailing edge of each arm. They are very like bird feathers, with a central stalk, and vanes on either side. Its arms were too short for it to fly."}
{"id": "44618", "revid": "983938", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44618", "title": "Protarchaeopteryx", "text": "Protarchaeopteryx was a small feathered dinosaur from China. It was a bird-like predator with teeth. It looked like \"Archaeopteryx\". It is one of the Chinese feathered dinosaurs."}
{"id": "44619", "revid": "624194", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44619", "title": "Pentaceratops", "text": "Pentaceratops was a very large ceratopsian dinosaur. It was almost 11 meters in length and 4 meters tall. It was larger than Triceratops."}
{"id": "44623", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44623", "title": "Hyper text markup language", "text": ""}
{"id": "44624", "revid": "4580", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44624", "title": "Hypertext markup language", "text": ""}
{"id": "44628", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44628", "title": "Servers", "text": ""}
{"id": "44629", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44629", "title": "Greenwich Mean Time", "text": "Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) is an internationally standardized time format. It is the main time zone in several countries, including the United Kingdom and Portugal. GMT has the same time as UTC, but there are differences between the two. Technically, GMT is a time zone, while UTC is a time standard.\nGMT was established in 1884 at the International Meridian Conference, which met to establish a standardized system for measuring world longitude. They decided that the meridian passing through the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England would be 0\u00b0 longitude.This conference also decided that the time zone around the meridian, GMT, would be the time zone used for reference around the world. Other countries would define their time based on GMT.\nUTC was defined in 1963 as the new world reference for time. The major advantage of the new standard was that its time was determined by highly accurate atomic clocks, not the sun at Greenwich. Other advantages of UTC are that calling the new standard Coordinated Universal Time avoids giving more importance to any one country, and that UTC does not adjust for Daylight Saving Time, which means the world always has a standard time."}
{"id": "44630", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44630", "title": "GMT", "text": ""}
{"id": "44639", "revid": "917214", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44639", "title": "Reciprocal", "text": "In mathematics, the reciprocal (or multiplicative inverse) of a number is 1 divided by the number, or equivalently, the number raised to the power of -1 (as in formula_1 and formula_2). All numbers have a reciprocal except zero, since no number times 0 is 1. Two numbers are reciprocal of each other if and only if their product is 1. For example:\nTo find the reciprocal of a fraction, swap the numerator and the denominator. Whole numbers can be thought as having a denominator of 1. For example: \nDividing a fraction is the same as multiplying its reciprocal and vice versa."}
{"id": "44643", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44643", "title": "2006 in spaceflight", "text": "Launches.\nThis is a list of spacecraft which were launched into space during the year 2006."}
{"id": "44645", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44645", "title": "19 January", "text": ""}
{"id": "44646", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44646", "title": "18 February", "text": ""}
{"id": "44648", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44648", "title": "21 February", "text": ""}
{"id": "44649", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44649", "title": "22 March", "text": ""}
{"id": "44650", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44650", "title": "30 March", "text": ""}
{"id": "44651", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44651", "title": "15 December", "text": ""}
{"id": "44652", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44652", "title": "14 December", "text": ""}
{"id": "44653", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44653", "title": "10 December", "text": ""}
{"id": "44654", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44654", "title": "17 November", "text": ""}
{"id": "44655", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44655", "title": "8 November", "text": ""}
{"id": "44656", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44656", "title": "4 November", "text": ""}
{"id": "44657", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44657", "title": "30 October", "text": ""}
{"id": "44658", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44658", "title": "23 October", "text": ""}
{"id": "44659", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44659", "title": "19 October", "text": ""}
{"id": "44660", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44660", "title": "11 September", "text": ""}
{"id": "44661", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44661", "title": "4 July", "text": ""}
{"id": "44662", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44662", "title": "27 June", "text": ""}
{"id": "44663", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44663", "title": "25 June", "text": ""}
{"id": "44664", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44664", "title": "18 June", "text": ""}
{"id": "44665", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44665", "title": "15 June", "text": ""}
{"id": "44666", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44666", "title": "14 June", "text": ""}
{"id": "44667", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44667", "title": "27 May", "text": ""}
{"id": "44668", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44668", "title": "26 May", "text": ""}
{"id": "44669", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44669", "title": "3 May", "text": ""}
{"id": "44670", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44670", "title": "24 April", "text": ""}
{"id": "44671", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44671", "title": "20 April", "text": ""}
{"id": "44672", "revid": "6786", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44672", "title": "14 April", "text": ""}
{"id": "44673", "revid": "558551", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44673", "title": "12 April", "text": ""}
{"id": "44674", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44674", "title": "British Museum", "text": "The British Museum in London is one of the world's largest and most important museums of human history and culture. It has more than seven million objects from all continents. They illustrate and document the story of human culture from its beginning to the present. As with all other national museums and art galleries in Britain, the Museum charges no admission fee. \nThe British Museum set up in 1753 and opened in 1759. It was the first museum in the world to be open to everyone. The museum gradually grew over the next two hundred years. It has nearly six million visitors a year and is the third most popular art museum in the world. \nSome of the museum's most popular and important exhibits include the Rosetta Stone and the Elgin Marbles.\nHistory.\nThe history of the British Museum began with the Irish born British physicist Hans Sloane, who died aged 93 in 1753. During his life, he had collected many important things from all around the world. When he died, he did not want his collection to be split up between his relatives. He sold his collection to the parliament of King George II. The parliament set up the British Museum to hold the collection. By the time he died, Sloane had collected over 80,000 objects from all over the world including Egypt, Greece, Rome and the Americas. The collection was mostly books and manuscripts. There were many important archaeological pieces included as well.\nThe government looked at many possible places to build the new museum, including Buckingham House, which later became Buckingham Palace. Eventually a building called Montagu House was chosen. The Museum opened on 15 January 1759, although all visitors had to be shown around by stewards. Over the years the museum began to concentrate more and more on historical objects and sculptures. For this reason they were given the Rosetta Stone by King George III in 1802. The Rosetta Stone had previously been important to French historians trying understand the Hieroglyph language written by the Ancient Egyptians. In 1816 the Museum acquired the Elgin Marbles from Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin. Elgin had taken them from the Parthenon in Athens, Greece several years earlier. Many people disagreed with the way Elgin took them from Greece. They compared his acts to looting and vandalism. People still argue about this issue today.\nIn 1822 King George III donated the entire Royal Library to the museum. This contained over 65,000 books and pamphlets. In 1823 the original building was demolished and work began on new buildings to hold the ever growing collection. Some of the space was freed up when the National Gallery opened in 1824, as many of the Museum's paintings and drawings were moved there.\nNew building and expansion.\nThe Museums collection continued to get bigger over the following years, and more and more buildings were added to hold the new objects. Important discoveries by people working for the British Museum included the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus by Charles Newton in 1857 and the Temple of Artemis in 1869. Many things found at these sites were taken to the Museum, where they have remained ever since. In 1852 the British Museum's famous round Reading Room was opened. It had enough space to display a million books at once.\nThe collection continued to get bigger and bigger. Eventually the Natural History Museum was set up in 1887 to hold the natural parts of the Museum's collection. It was around this time that electric lights were first put in the Museum. It was one of the first public places in England to do so.\nIn the early 1900s the Museum's board of directors bought all the houses surrounding it, knocked them all down and built over them. In 1939, just before the start of World War II, most of the Museum's exhibits were taken to other places because the directors were worried the Nazis might bomb the Museum during the Blitz. The exhibits were stored in old London Underground stations, as well as other places. The evacuation proved to be a good idea, as parts of the Museum were destroyed by bombs in 1940.\nInto the modern day.\nMuch of the 1950s was spent fixing the parts of the Museum destroyed by the bombing, and bringing back the pieces that had been taken away. During all this time the collection continued to get bigger, although space was slowly running out for all the books being brought in. The British Library was set up in 1973 to deal with this problem. In 1972 the Museum was loaned the Tutankhamun collection from the Museum of Cairo. They held a big exhibition called 'The Treasures of Tutankhamun' and it attracted over 1.5 million people to come and see it. \nIn 1998 the central courtyard, which had been unused before, was turned into the Great Court with the Reading Room at its centre. The Great Court has over 2 acres of space under its roof. This makes it the largest covered public space in Europe. It was opened by Queen Elizabeth II in January 2000.\nSince then the Museum has collected more things to do with history, rather than more modern pieces. They now have a large collection of Roman British, Ancient Greek and Ancient Egyptian artefacts, as well as objects from many other cultures and times around the world.\nDepartments.\nBecause of its extremely large size the Museum's collection is split into many parts, called \"departments\". The departments have changed many times over the years. They are sometimes merged together, split into smaller departments or renamed and changed altogether.\nDepartment of Ancient Egypt and Sudan.\nThe British Museums department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan is one of the biggest collections of Ancient Egyptian art in the world. Only the Egyptian Museum in Cairo has a bigger collection. They cover Egyptian and Sudanese history from around 10000 BC all the way to the 12th century AD, a period of around 12,000 years. \nAround 150 of the objects in the Egyptian department were part of the first collection which was given to the Museum by Hans Sloane in 1753. In 1801 the British defeated the French, led by Napoleon Bonaparte, at the battle of the Nile. After the battle, British forces took lots of Ancient Egyptian artifacts from the defeated French. They were given to the British Museum in 1803. These objects included the famous Rosetta Stone.\nThe department continued to get bigger, paying for archaeologists to go to Egypt and Sudan. They did this until 2001 when the Egyptian government made it much harder for Museums to take historical artefacts back to their own country. The collection now has over 110,000 exhibits.\nDepartment of Greece and Rome.\nThe British Museum's department of Greece and Rome is one of the biggest collections of Ancient Greek and Roman objects in the world. The objects come from nearly 4000 years of European history, from 3200 BC all the way to the 4th century AD.\nIt contains parts of two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World; the Mausoleum at Halikarnassos and the Temple of Artemis at Ephesos. It also had many pieces taken from the Parthenon in Athens, Greece. Like the rest of the Museum the department gets most of its collection from excavations or the acquiring of private collections. Some of the earliest objects in the collection were bought from the collection of Sir William Hamilton in 1772. In recent years the Museum's rules on how it can get objects have become much stricter. Other countries rules on allowing Museums to take objects away have also got stricter. This has meant the British Museum has gradually taken fewer items each year in recent times.\nDepartment of the Middle East.\nThe British Museum Department of the Middle East has the largest collection of Mesopotamian art in the world, outside Iraq. It has some 300,000 objects, covering the Neolithic period until present. It has objects from all over the Middle East including Mesopotamia (Iraq), Anatolia (Turkey), Levant (Syria, Lebanon and Jordan) and some pieces from central Asia. The Assyrian and Sumerian collections are also some of the biggest in the world.\nThe Collection.\nKey objects in the collection include:"}
{"id": "44677", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44677", "title": "Dexter (TV series)", "text": "Dexter is an American television series that was shown on Showtime network. It is based on the book \"Darkly Dreaming Dexter\" written by Jeff Lindsay. The show tells a story about a serial killer, Dexter Morgan, who works as a forensics analyst for the police in Miami. The main actor of the show is Michael C. Hall."}
{"id": "44678", "revid": "1145494", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44678", "title": "Python (programming language)", "text": "Python\u00a0is an\u00a0open source\u00a0programming language that was made to be easy-to-read and powerful. A\u00a0Dutch programmer\u00a0named Guido van Rossum made\u00a0Python\u00a0in 1991. He named it after the television show Monty Python's Flying Circus. Many Python examples and tutorials include jokes from the show.\nPython is . Interpreted languages do not need to be compiled to run. A program called an interpreter runs Python code on\u00a0almost any kind of computer.\u00a0This means that a programmer can change the code and quickly see the results. This also means Python is slower than a compiled language like C, because it is not running machine code directly.\nPython is a good programming language for beginners. It is a high-level language, which means a programmer can focus on what to do instead of how to do it. Writing programs in Python takes less time than in some other languages.\nPython drew inspiration from\u00a0other programming languages\u00a0like C, C++, Java, Perl, and Lisp.\nPython's developers try to avoid changing the language to make it better until they have a lot of things to change. Also, they try not to make small repairs, called patches, to unimportant parts of the CPython reference implementation that would make it faster. When speed is important, a Python programmer can move some of the work of the program to other parts written in programming languages like C or PyPy, a just-in-time compiler. It translates a Python script into C and makes direct C-level API calls into the Python interpreter.\nKeeping Python fun to use is an important goal of Python\u2019s developers. It reflects in the language's name, a tribute to the British comedy group Monty Python. On occasions, they are playful approaches to tutorials and reference materials, such as referring to spam and eggs instead of the standard foo and bar.\nPython use.\nPython is used by hundreds of thousands of programmers and is used in many places. Sometimes only Python code is used for a program, but most of the time it is used to do simple jobs while another programming language is used to do more complicated tasks.\nIts standard library is made up of many functions that come with Python when it is installed. On the Internet there are many other libraries available that make it possible for the Python language to do more things. These libraries make it a powerful language; it can do many different things.\nSome things that Python is often used for are:\nSyntax.\nPython has a very easy-to-read syntax. Some of Python's syntax comes from C, because that is the language that Python was written in. But Python uses whitespace to delimit code: spaces or tabs are used to organize code into groups. This is different from C. In C, there is a semicolon at the end of each line and curly braces ({}) are used to group code. Using whitespace to delimit code makes Python a very easy-to-read language.\nStatements and control flow.\nPython's statements include:\nExpressions.\nPython's expressions include some that are similar to other programming languages and others that are not.\nExample.\nThis is a small example of a Python program. It shows \"Hello World!\" on the screen. \nprint(\"Hello World!\")\nready = True\nif ready:\n print(\"Hello World!\")\nPython also does something called \"dynamic variable assignment\". This means that when a number or word is made in a program, the user does not have to say what type it is. This makes it easier to reuse variable names, making fast changes simpler. An example of this is shown below. This code will make both a number and a word, and show them both, using only one variable.\nx = 1\nprint(x)\nx = \"Word\"\nprint(x)\nIn a \"statically typed\" language like C, a programmer would have to say whether codice_3 was a number or a word before C would let the programmer set up codice_3, and after that, C would not allow its type to change from a number to a word."}
{"id": "44693", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44693", "title": "Back to the Future", "text": "Back to the Future is a 1985 American science fiction adventure movie directed by Robert Zemeckis and written by Bob Gale. It stars Michael J. Fox, Christopher Lloyd and Crispin Glover. It is the first movie for the \"Back to the Future trilogy\".\nPlot.\nIn 1985, Doc Emmett Brown shows teenage Marty his new creation: a car which can travel through time. The heart of the time machine is \"the flux capacitor,\" invented by Dr. Brown. The time machine needs plutonium to provide the power for the flux capacitor. Marty uses the car to escape from Libyan terrorists and accidentally goes back to the year 1955. Marty seeks out and meets Dr. Brown in 1955. The time machine is out of plutonium, and there is no plutonium available for the time machine in 1955. By chance, Marty knows the time and place of a one-time natural event (lightning strike) that can provide the power to transport the time machine and Marty back to 1985.\nThe situation in 1955 is complicated when Marty meets his own parents as teenagers. When he helps his father, he accidentally changes the events that lead to his parents becoming a couple. Marty's teenage mother becomes interested in Marty instead of Marty's father, George. With the help of the Doc of 1955, Marty tries to undo the damage he has done, and make his mother fall in love with his father. If he can get his parents back together, he has very little time to get back to the car to use the lightning strike to take the time machine and him (Marty) back to the future (i.e. 1985)."}
{"id": "44694", "revid": "70439", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44694", "title": "Stargate", "text": "Stargate is a science fiction media franchise and may refer to:"}
{"id": "44695", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44695", "title": "Arthur Schopenhauer", "text": "Arthur Schopenhauer (February 22, 1788 in Danzig \u2013 September 21, 1860 in Frankfurt am Main) was a German philosopher.\nHe was influenced by Kant, Plato and eastern teachings, especially Buddhism and the Upanishads.\nSchopenhauer believed that the primary characteristic, or essence of all things - including human beings - is not intelligence, rationality or spirit, but will. By \"will\" he means a wanting and craving like that which we know in ourselves as our \"will.\" It is the source of immense amounts of suffering in the world. He also believed that a \"better consciousness\" could be attained by denying the fulfilment of our desires, taking time to think about who we really are and what we should do to avoid suffering - but also, in doing something few philosophers of his day spoke of: in making and looking at works of art, especially music, which he considered a way to escape from the world's pain and suffering.\nSchopenhauer was a huge influence on Richard Wagner, Friedrich Nietzsche, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Thomas Mann, Sigmund Freud, Leo Tolstoy, Carl Jung, Emil Cioran and many other important artists and thinkers of the 20th Century."}
{"id": "44697", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44697", "title": "2005 Cronulla riots", "text": "The 2005 Cronulla riots were a series of violent events between Lebanese and white Australian mobs. Riots started in and around Cronulla, a suburb on the beach in Sydney, Australia's biggest city. The violence was soon also in other suburbs around Sydney. The riots happened on 11, 12 and 14 December. Many people committed crimes there.\nSeveral people were sent to prison for being involved in the riot."}
{"id": "44698", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44698", "title": "Cronulla Riots", "text": ""}
{"id": "44699", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44699", "title": "1992 Los Angeles riots", "text": "The 1992 Los Angeles riots, also called Rodney King uprising or Rodney King riots, started on April 29, 1992 when a jury set four white policemen free. The jury was mostly Caucasian. The policemen had beaten up African-American motorist Rodney King badly and filmed this, after he fled from police. Thousands of people in Los Angeles, mostly African American and Hispanic, rioted. In all, 55 people were killed in the riots."}
{"id": "44700", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44700", "title": "Los Angeles riots", "text": ""}
{"id": "44707", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44707", "title": "Hypotenuse", "text": "The hypotenuse is the side opposite the 90 degrees angle in a right triangle. It is always the longest side.\nFor example:\nIn this triangle, if angle C is 90 degrees, then the opposite side, \"c\", is the hypotenuse. The hypotenuse is important in trigonometry, where it is used to calculate many functions.\nThe length of the hypotenuse can be calculated if the other two sides are known, using Pythagoras' Theorem. In fact, the length of any side of a right triangle can be calculated if the other two sides are known, using this theorem."}
{"id": "44711", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44711", "title": "Ni\u00f0avellir", "text": "In Norse Mythology, the Ni\u00f0avellir are dark fields, mentioned in the V\u00f6luspa. The dwarves live there."}
{"id": "44714", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44714", "title": "Nidavellir", "text": ""}
{"id": "44716", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44716", "title": "Python", "text": "Python is the name given to a genus of constricting snakes. Such snakes are not venomous. its family is the \"Pythonidae\". Pythons are more closely related to boas than to any other snake family. \nBoulenger (1890) thought this group was a subfamily (Pythoninae) of the family Boidae (boas). However, boas produce live young, while pythons are oviparous: they lay eggs.\n\"Python\" can be found in Southeast Asia and Africa, and other members of the family are found in New Guinea and Australia. Pythons can range from 3 feet long in species like ball pythons to 29 feet in species like reticulated pythons. \"Python\" is one of eight genera in the family. They all have a rather similar life style.\nMost members of the family are ambush predators: they stay motionless in a camouflaged position, and then strike suddenly at passing prey. They wrap their body round the prey and squeeze. To kill its prey, the python squeezes it to death, then swallows it whole. Larger pythons can prey on animals as large as a full-grown deer. In Africa, there are pythons that eat gazelles. Most of their prey is much smaller than that. Pythons may take several days or even weeks to fully digest prey.\nDespite their size, pythons are rarely dangerous to humans.\n\"Python\" can be up to 900\u00a0cm long and weigh up to 90\u00a0kg, but males are much smaller and lighter than females. The python can live up to 30 years. The breeding time is between 60 or 70 days.\nResearch indicates that all snakes, including pythonids, are descended from a venomous ancestor.\nPythons in unusual places.\nBurmese pythons have become an invasive species in south Florida. The problem is most serious in the Everglades National Park.\nIn 2013 a pet python killed two children in New Brunswick, Canada."}
{"id": "44723", "revid": "248200", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44723", "title": "Consultation (Bah\u00e1'\u00ed practice)", "text": "Consultation is a special way of discussing problems and making decisions used by Bah\u00e1'\u00eds. \nThe word consult generally means to talk about something, consider all the facts, and make a decision. To Bah\u00e1'\u00eds, consultation also means:\nConsultation is used by Bah\u00e1'\u00ed elected leaders when they gather in councils to make sure no one person gets to decide everything. Married people consult with their husband or wife to solve difficulties in the marriage. Parents and children may consult, teachers and students may consult, and Bah\u00e1'\u00eds all consult as a community when they get together every nineteen days."}
{"id": "44726", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44726", "title": "List of riots", "text": "This is a list of important riots that happened:"}
{"id": "44727", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44727", "title": "Dublin, Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "44729", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44729", "title": "Serbian language", "text": "Serbian is South Slavic language spoken by Serbs, primarily in Serbia, Kosovo, Montenegro and some parts of neighboring countries. It is also spoken by many Serbs in diaspora, mainly in Central European countries, North America and Australia. The language is European and south Slavic. This language got a complete makeover in the mid-1800s by Serbian linguist Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107; when it was modernized from the times of Middle Ages, when \"Old Serbian\" was still spoken. Total number of speakers worldwide today is estimated to be more than 12 million."}
{"id": "44733", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44733", "title": "Namaste", "text": "Namaste or Namaskar is a neutral greeting used a lot in many East Asian countries. It is used when Hello and Hi are used in English, though it has a very different meaning.\nNamaste is kind of like a praise to the person receiving the namaste.\nThe word's meaning is \u201cI bow to the divine in you.\u201d Namaste is a traditional Indian greeting of respect and thank you, with spiritual and symbolic meaning."}
{"id": "44734", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44734", "title": "Vessel element", "text": " \nA vessel element (trachea) is one of the cell types found in xylem, the water conducting tissue of plants. \nVessel elements are found in flowering plants (angiosperms) but not in most gymnosperms such as conifers. Vessel elements are the main feature distinguishing the \"hardwood\" of angiosperms from the \"softwood\" of conifers.\nStructure.\nXylem vessels are a long straight chain made of tough long dead cells known as vessel elements. The vessel have no cytoplasm. They are not living, but are made by living cells. The cells are arranged end to end and the cell walls have disappeared. This makes a tube. \nVessels are made of a substance called lignin. They have a lignified cell wall and a central cavity. Vessel members are interconnected through perforations in their common walls. Lignin is a hard organic polymer. It makes the cell walls rigid and is very long-lasting. It is the lignin in xylem vessels which holds trees up.\nFunction.\nWater flows up the xylem vessels. The evaporation of water from the stomata cells in the leaves pulls up the water in a transpiration stream. This is called capillary action, because it depends on the way water molecules stick to the walls of the xylem (adhesion). \nThere is also some root pressure, because water enters the roots by osmosis. This is important so water gets upwards during the night when transpiration is low.\nAs the water goes up, it carries some minerals with it, so actually the xylem brings some basic nutrients to the plant. The phloem mostly distributes the more complex organic molecules."}
{"id": "44741", "revid": "689292", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44741", "title": "Confluence", "text": "Confluence means the meeting of two or more waterways. \nIt usually means the point where a smaller river joins a more major river. \nExample.\nThe German city name Koblenz indicates that the city lies at the point at the confluence of the Rhine and the Moselle."}
{"id": "44742", "revid": "823563", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44742", "title": "Artificial neural network", "text": "A neural network (also called an ANN or an artificial neural network) is a sort of computer software, inspired by biological neurons. Biological brains are capable of solving difficult problems, but each neuron is only responsible for solving a very small part of the problem. Similarly, a neural network is made up of cells that work together to produce a desired result, although each individual cell is only responsible for solving a small part of the problem. This is one method for creating artificially intelligent programs.\nNeural networks are an example of machine learning, where a program can change as it learns to solve a problem. A neural network can be trained and improved with each example, but the larger the neural network, the more examples it needs to perform well\u2014often needing millions or billions of examples in the case of deep learning.\nOverview.\nThere are two ways to think of a neural network. First is like a human brain. Second is like a mathematical equation.\nA network starts with an input, somewhat like a sensory organ. Information then flows through layers of neurons, where each neuron is connected to many other neurons. If a particular neuron receives enough stimuli, then it sends a message to any other neuron is it connected to through its axon. Similarly, an artificial neural network has an input layer of data, one or more hidden layers of classifiers, and an output layer. Each node in each hidden layer is connected to a node in the next layer. When a node receives information, it sends along some amount of it to the nodes it is connected to. The amount is determined by a mathematical function called an activation function, such as sigmoid or tanh.\nThinking of a neural network like a mathematical equation, a neural network is simply a list of mathematical operations to be applied to an input. The input and output of each operation is a tensor (or more specifically a vector or matrix). Each pair of layers is connected by a list of weights. Each layer has several tensors stored in it. An individual tensor in a layer is called a node. Each node is connected to some or all of the nodes in the next layer by a weight. Each node also has a list of values called biases. The value of each layer is then the out of the activation function of the values of the current layer (called X) multiplied by the weights.\nformula_1\nA cost function is defined for the network. The loss function tries to estimate how well the neural network is doing at its assigned task. Finally, an optimization technique is applied to minimize the output of the cost function by changing the weights and biases of the network. This process is called training. Training is done one small step at a time. After thousands of steps, the network is typically able to do its assigned task pretty well.\nExample.\nConsider a program that checks whether a person is alive. It checks two things - the pulse, and breath.If a person has either a pulse or is breathing, the program will output 'alive', otherwise, it will output 'dead'. In a program that does not learn over time, this would be written as:\nfunction isAlive(pulse, breathing) {\n if(pulse || breathing) {\n return true;\n } else {\n return false;\nA very simple neural network, made of just one neuron that solves the same problem will look like this:\nThe values of pulse, breathing, and alive will be either 0 or 1, representing false and true. Thus, if this neuron is given the values (0,1), (1,0) or (1,1), it should output 1, and if it is given (0,0), it should output 0. The neuron does this by applying a simple mathematical operation to the input - it adds whatever values it has been given together, and then adds its own hidden value, which is called a 'bias'. To start with, this hidden value is random, and we adjust it over time if the neuron is not giving us the desired output.\nIf we add values such as (1,1) together, we might end up with numbers greater than 1, but we want our output to be between 0 and 1! To solve this, we can apply a function which limits our actual output to 0 or 1, even if the result of the neuron's math was not within the range. In more complicated neural networks, we apply a function (such as sigmoid) to the neuron, so that its value will be between 0 or 1 (such as 0.66), and then we pass on this value to the next neuron all the way until we need our output.\nLearning methods.\nThere are three ways a neural network can learn: supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. These methods all work by either minimizing or maximizing a cost function, but each one is better at certain tasks.\nRecently, a research team from the University of Hertfordshire, UK used reinforcement learning to make an iCub humanoid robot learn to say simple words by babbling."}
{"id": "44743", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44743", "title": "Werra", "text": "The Werra is a river in the central part of Germany. The Werra has its source near \"Fehrenbach\" in Thuringia. After 293 km, the Werra joins the Fulda River in Hann. M\u00fcnden, making the Weser. The Werra valley (\"Werratal\") makes a natural border between the Rh\u00f6n hills and the Thuringian Forest. "}
{"id": "44744", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44744", "title": "Blackout", "text": "In medicine, the word blackout is a form of amnesia. The amnesia may be complete or partial. Such an amnesia can be provoked by: \nAfter the cause is gone full mental powers are usually restored, although there may be a blank in memory."}
{"id": "44748", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44748", "title": "Muspelheim", "text": "Muspelheim (also called Muspel) is the realm of fire, in Norse mythology. The fire giants live there. Their king is Surtr.\nAccording to the Ragnarok prophecies, the Sons of Muspel will break the Bifrost bridge, signaling that time is ending:"}
{"id": "44749", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44749", "title": "J\u00f6tnar", "text": "A Jotun or J\u00f6tun in Norse mythology, is a giant. Groups of them are called J\u00f6tnar. Many are very large and strong; some are not. Sometimes however, gods and J\u00f6tnar would marry. The Frost giant's stronghold is called Utgardr and it is in J\u00f6tunheimr, the name for their realm. This is one of the nine Norse realms. J\u00f6tunheim is separated from Midgard, or Earth, by high mountains, and large forests. Outside their home world, giants seem to prefer to live in caves. "}
{"id": "44750", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44750", "title": "Jotun", "text": ""}
{"id": "44751", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44751", "title": "J\u00f6tun", "text": ""}
{"id": "44753", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44753", "title": "J\u00f6tunheimr", "text": ""}
{"id": "44754", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44754", "title": "Countryside", "text": ""}
{"id": "44756", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44756", "title": "Hansen's disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "44757", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44757", "title": "BBC Sports Personality of the Year", "text": "The BBC Sports Personality of the Year is an award that is given to a sportsperson in December every year. Only British or foreign sportspeople based in the United Kingdom are allowed to win the award. It started in 1954."}
{"id": "44758", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44758", "title": "Labyrinth", "text": "The Labyrinth was an elaborate structure designed and built by the legendary Daedalus for King Minos of Crete at Knossos. \nIts function was to hold the Minotaur, which was eventually killed by the hero Theseus. Daedalus had so cleverly made the Labyrinth that he could barely escape it after he built it.\nPliny's Natural History mentions four ancient labyrinths: the Cretan labyrinth, an Egyptian labyrinth, a Lemnian labyrinth, and an Italian labyrinth."}
{"id": "44760", "revid": "1138430", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44760", "title": "Amnesia", "text": "Amnesia is what doctors call a loss or disturbance of memory. It is a loss of memory, that is to say, a person cannot remember certain things. Amnesia can be caused when someone has brain damage, a disease or when something really stressful happens.\nThere are two \"main types\":\nThe fact that adults usually cannot remember events that occurred in early childhood is called \"infantile amnesia\". It is attributed to the development of the brain or that of the child. It is not seen as a form of amnesia comparable to the other types. \nCauses.\nThere are three main categories in which amnesia can happen to a person.\nSome other different types of amnesia include:\nAmnesia can be permanent, or it can be temporary. Damage to the [brain], or the use of certain [drug]s can cause amnesia. Some of these drugs are [sedative]s. Another well known cause for amnesia can be drinking too much [alcohol]. Those kinds of causes are called \"organic\", because they can been directly seen. Other causes cannot directly be seen, they are called \"functional\". Rather they are [psychology|psychological] in their nature. People may want to shield off a traumatic event they witnessed, for example.\nAnother minor cause of amnesia is \"heartbreak\" in a relationship. It can lead to trauma, but it is not necessarily traumatic.\nTreatment.\nSometimes certain types of amnesia fix themselves without being treated. There are also different types of therapy that work with the brain to help with amnesia. There is no medicine that can directly help with amnesia."}
{"id": "44761", "revid": "547196", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44761", "title": "Icarus", "text": "Icarus was the son of Daedalus. Daedalus was imprisoned in his own invention, the labyrinth. He helped the hero Theseus kill King Minos\u2019s beast, the Minotaur, and run away with King Minos\u2019s daughter, Ariadne. \nDaedelus came up with a plan. He knew that Minos controlled all escape routes by land or sea, so he decided to go by air. He built wings for himself and Icarus. They found their way out of the labyrinth and flew out of the highest tower. \nIcarus foolishly ignored his father\u2019s advice to fly on the same route as him so that the sun would not melt the wings and the sea would not dampen them. Icarus flew up higher and higher toward the sun, and the wax in the wings melted and he fell into the sea and drowned. Daedalus looked down towards the sea and saw the feathers floating on the water and figured out what happened. Eventually Daedalus found the body and buried it on the island of Icaria, and the sea which Icarus fell into is now called the Icarian Sea."}
{"id": "44762", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44762", "title": "Sportscene", "text": "Sportscene is a Scottish television programme. It is about sports. It is made by BBC Scotland. Dougie Donnelly and Dougie Vipond are the main presenters of the program. Paul Mitchell is the usual commentator for football matches."}
{"id": "44763", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44763", "title": "Trauma", "text": "Trauma is the name doctors have for a physical injury caused by something outside the body. Depending on what was injured there are different kinds of traumas."}
{"id": "44766", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44766", "title": "Madeleine L'Engle", "text": "Madeline L'Engle (November 29, 1918 \u2013 September 6, 2007) was an American writer. Her book \"A Wrinkle in Time\" won the Newbery Medal. \"A Wrinkle in Time\" was made into a movie in 2003.\nL'Engle was born in 1918 in New York City, New York. She died at her home in Connecticut on September 6, 2007."}
{"id": "44767", "revid": "1073251", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44767", "title": "Henry Hudson", "text": "Henry Hudson (1565 \u2013 disappeared 23 June 1611) was an English explorer and navigator in the 1600s. He was well known for discovering the Hudson River and the Hudson Bay.\nHudson was trying to find a northwest passage to Cathay (present day China). He tried twice before he found it. Hudson discovered the Hudson Bay and Hudson River in North America. He claimed the Hudson Bay for England along with other pieces of land. He was working for the Dutch when he found the Hudson River. He found it in 1609 when he was looking for a way to get from North America to Asia by water. This was named the Northwest Passage. Hudson was believed to go to Harvard Law school where he learned a variety of subjects including navigation, seamanship, astronomy, mathematics and cartography."}
{"id": "44768", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44768", "title": "Clara Bow", "text": "Clara Gordon Bow (; July 29, 1905 \u2013 September 27, 1965) was an American actress. She was born in Brooklyn, New York City. She was one of the most famous movie actresses in the history of silent movies. Bow died September 27, 1965 of a heart attack in Los Angeles, California at the age of 60.\nBow acted in 57 movies between 1922 and 1933. She is considered the first American sex symbol after her work in the 1927 movie \"It\". That movie also created the term \"The \"It\" Girl\" meaning the most popular girl at the moment. Bow was the original \"It\" girl. She was the person every movie studio tried to get in their movies. She was the person who the audiences always want to see more of. She was the focus of media attention. She retired at age 28. In 1944 Bow tried to kill herself. She was diagnosed with schizophrenia. \nBow was born in Prospect Heights."}
{"id": "44770", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44770", "title": "Endothermy", "text": ""}
{"id": "44775", "revid": "1135502", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44775", "title": "Sales quote", "text": "A sales quote is an estimated amount that a person selling something gives to a customer. It is given to show them how much it would cost to have the work done. Many services do not have fixed prices for work. The cost can change depending on the tools, materials and how much work is needed to be done for each customer. The person calculates an estimated amount, and gives this to the customer, so that they can have an idea how much it will cost. A sales quote is simply a formal statement. However, it cannot be considered a legally binding contract. It is a mutual understanding in the form of document between the seller and the buyer. However, once the quote has been accepted, the customer is committed to making a purchase at the stated price. A quotation is a business document that is similar to an invoice and contains all the same elements. However, the purpose for both are different, to provide the customer with a detailed list of the product or service being offered, before the order is confirmed.\nSales quote is for example a quote given to the customer by auto insurance broker based on details like income, work position, criminal record and others.\nThe sales quote is figured from the information given by the potential customer, about the work they would like to have done."}
{"id": "44779", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44779", "title": "MapleStory", "text": "MapleStory is an online computer game made by the Korean company Wizet, and maintained and distributed by Nexon. Playing the game is free, but people can buy clothes and other in-game items from the \"Cash Shop\" using money. MapleStory has way less than 10,000 concurrent players world-wide. The game has many different versions for people to play on based on location. MapleStory got its name from the maple leaf. Therefore, the game has the maple leaf item during events.\nGameplay.\nThis game is a 2D side-scrolling Massive Multi-player Online Role Playing Game (short form is MMORPG) which required players to create characters and then play the game as the \"Novice Job Advancement\". The name depends on the class he or she picked. Then, one does quests or grinds at monsters until either LV. 120 or LV. 200 depending on the class one chooses.\nOne can get Job Advancements to get stronger in-game. Please note the number of the level required to job advance might change due to some recent patches:\n1st Job requires LV. 10, 2nd Job requires LV. 30, 3rd Job requires LV. 70 (LV. 60 after the Tempest expansion) and 4th Job requires LV. 120. (LV. 100 after the Tempest expansion)\nEvery year, MapleStory receives a lot of updates, which some players found the game going into a better direction but some players felt that the game is just getting spoiled.\nThe Maple World is known to be big that one needs to use transportation to travel over places. Taking a ship required the in-game currency mesos and some waiting time. However, to prevent other characters to be a goner forever, the ship is free of charge.\nMeso is the in-game currency for MapleStory used to buy potions, equipment or cool items in the Free Market (Note: The Free Market prices are not free, the items are usually as expensive as one billion.)\nMesos cannot be bought. They are hard to earn by questing or trading and are easy to spend on things in the Free Market.\nThere are other systems and features in the game.\nMapleStory DS.\nMapleStory DS (Korean: \uba54\uc774\ud50c\uc2a4\ud1a0\ub9ac DS) is a Nintendo DS game coming in April 2010, being worked on with Nexon and Nintendo. They said that the Korean put-up date was in 2009.\nThe game was talked about in E3 2006. On January 9 2007, Nexon and the newly made Nintendo of Korea put up a trailer for the game. They first said the game would be put up in September 2007. It was found out it will be an online game, that works with the Nintendo DS Wi-Fi System. In an interview with the boss of international business development, Stephen Lee said that the game will work in single player. He also said there were going to be microphone and touch-responsive features."}
{"id": "44781", "revid": "801958", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44781", "title": "Kiwa hirsuta", "text": "Kiwa hirsuta is a crustacean that was first found living on the Pacific Ocean floor at 7200 feet deep, 900 miles south of Easter Island in March 2005. It is about 6 inches long, or 15 centimeters. It looks a little like a crab, but its long arms are covered with yellow fur that looks like silk, so its discoverers, from the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Insititute, named it the Yeti Crab or Yeti Lobster. But it is so different from other crustaceans that it was given its own scientific family, Kiwaidae."}
{"id": "44783", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44783", "title": "Parallel (geometry)", "text": "Parallel is a term in geometry and in everyday life that refers to a property of lines or planes. Parallel lines or planes are next to each other, but never touch each other. This means they never intersect at any point. If two lines formula_1 and formula_2 are parallel, then we describe this by writing formula_3. The slopes of parallel lines are always equal.\nEven if these two line segments were extended to infinity, there would never be a point of intersection between the two of them. In fact, two parallel lines in the two-dimensional plane are always a fixed distance apart."}
{"id": "44784", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44784", "title": "Mount Fuji", "text": "Mount Fuji (\u5bcc\u58eb\u5c71, Fuji-san) is the tallest mountain in Japan, at \n high. It is also a volcano. It is on the border between Shizuoka Prefecture and Yamanashi Prefecture. Mount Fuji is a famous cultural icon of Japan, as a lot of people have painted it and taken photographs of it. It became the 13th UNESCO World Heritage Site in Japan on June 22, 2013. The last time it erupted was from 1707 to 1708.\nActive volcano.\nMount Fuji is officially classified as an active volcano, but some describe Fuji as dormant or inactive.\nThe last major event was the H\u014dei eruption of Mount Fuji which started on December 16, 1707 (\"H\u014dei 4, 23rd day of the 11th month\") and ended about January 1, 1708 (\"H\u014dei 4, 9th day of the 12th month\") during the Edo period. Cinders and ash from Fuji fell like rain in Izu Province, Kai Province, Sagami Province, and Musashi Province.\nShinto.\nThe mountain is thought to be named after Fuchi, the Buddhist fire goddess. The mountain is sacred in the Shinto religion and at the bottom of the mountain are shrines to the goddess Konohananosakuya-hime (\u30b3\u30ce\u30cf\u30ca\u30ce\u30b5\u30af\u30e4\u30d2\u30e1\uff09).\nClimbing.\nMany people climb Mt. Fuji every year. The official climbing season is in the summer: July 25 to August 25. There are three mountain-climbing routes on the Shizuoka side of Mt. Fuji. There is a post office on the top of Mt. Fuji which is open only in summer. The post office was built in 1909 and is the highest post office in Japan.\nMountain in art.\nIn 2009, Mount Fuji was recognized as one of the 100 Landscapes of Japan which best show contemporary Japan and its culture in the Heisei period. "}
{"id": "44785", "revid": "1140068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44785", "title": "Nu metal", "text": "Nu metal is a style of metal music that uses elements of hip hop and heavy metal music, as well as the usual heavy metal instruments such as guitars, drums and bass. Nu metal bands often include electronic instruments such as DJ decks and keyboards. Nu metal was very successful in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The most successful bands of this genre include Linkin Park (with more than 100 million records sold around the world), Korn (with 35 million), Deftones, Limp Bizkit (with 35 million) and Slipknot (around 15 million records)."}
{"id": "44792", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44792", "title": "Ketsumeishi", "text": "Ketsumeishi is Japanese hip hop group. It is a four-man group. They are \"Ryo\" and \"Ryoji\" and \"Daizo\" and \"DJKohno\". The group started performing in 1993. They have four albums, three DVDs and 20 singles."}
{"id": "44793", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44793", "title": "Subaru Impreza", "text": "The is a Japanese car. It is made by Subaru, which is owned by parent Company Fuji Heavy Industries. The car was first made in 1992. The design of the car has been changed 3 times; the first version was the 1992 model, with it being redesigned in 2000, 2008, and 2015. The next redesign is expected to come in 2018."}
{"id": "44794", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44794", "title": "Taka and Toshi", "text": "Taka and Toshi are a comedy pair from Hokkaido, Japan. Their favourite gag is \"Obei ka!!\""}
{"id": "44795", "revid": "1114343", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44795", "title": "Alain Prost", "text": "Alain Prost is a French retired automobile racer and Formula One World Champion. He was born February 24, 1955 in Lorette, France. His nickname is \"Professor\".\nProst is the one of the greatest Formula One drivers of all time. He won the championship four times: 1985, 1986, 1989 and 1993. Only Lewis Hamilton (7), Michael Schumacher (7) and Juan Manuel Fangio (5) have won more times than Prost.\nFormula One.\nHe started driving with McLaren in 1980. From 1981 until 1983, he was racing for Renault F1. Prost returned to McLaren in 1984 and raced for them until 1989. During this time he won his first three championships. Prost left McLaren to race for Scuderia Ferrari in 1990 and 1991. In 1992, Prost took a year off from racing. He returned to racing in 1993 with WilliamsF1. Prost retired from racing after winning his fourth title in that year.\nProst raced in 202 Grand Prix races between 1980 and 1993. He held the record for most wins with 51 until 2001. He was in the pole position in 33 of those races and had the fastest lap time in 41 races.\nCareer in numbers.\nComparison with team-mates.\nIn his career, Prost beat nearly all his team-mates on total points, including five World Champions. Only in 1980 he lost by a point and in 1984 by half a point."}
{"id": "44796", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44796", "title": "B'z", "text": "B'z is a Japanese hard rock band. It is made up of Takahiro Matsumoto (guitar) and Koshi Inaba (singer). B'z started playing on September 21, 1988. The band has sold more than 70 million CDs. They have had 19 albums sell over 1 million copies each."}
{"id": "44797", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44797", "title": "K-1", "text": "K-1 is a kickboxing competition. It is a mix of Kickboxing, Kung fu, Karate and Boxing. It started in 1993. K-1 has fighters from many countries."}
{"id": "44798", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44798", "title": "PRIDE Fighting Championships", "text": "PRIDE Fighting Championships was a mixed martial arts organization based in Japan.(1997-2007) PRIDE held more than sixty mixed martial arts events. As one of the most popular MMA organizations in the world during its ten years of operation, PRIDE broadcast to about 40 countries worldwide.\nHistory.\nPRIDE Fighting Championships was first started in 1997 by the match popular Japanese pro-wrestler Nobuhiko Takada with Rickson Gracie, champion of the Gracie family of Brazilian jiu-jitsu practitioners. The event, held at the Tokyo Dome on October 11, 1997 attracted 47,000 fans, as well as Japanese mass media attention. The success of the first event enabled its promoters to hold a regular series of mixed martial arts events and grew up to be the most popular mixed martial arts event in Japan.\nRules.\nMatch length.\nPRIDE matches make up of three rounds; the first round is ten minutes, and the second and third round are five minutes. Intermissions between each round were two minutes in length. In PRIDE US events, NSAC Unified MMA rules were used, with non-title matches consisting of three five minute rounds and title matches of 5 five minute rounds both having 60 second intermissions between rounds.\nWhen two rounds of a Grand Prix took place on the same night, Grand Prix bouts consisted of two rounds; the first lasting ten minutes and the second lasting five. Intermissions between each round remained two minutes in length.\nRING.\nPRIDE used a five-roped square ring with sides 7 m in length (approximately 23\u00a0ft).\nFighter\u2019s clothing.\nPRIDE allowed fighters latitude in their choice of clothing but open finger gloves, a mouthguard and a protective cup were duty. Fighters were allowed to use tape on parts of their body or to wear a gi top, gi pants (Judo, Jujutsu, Karate), wrestling shoes, kneepads, elbow pads, or ankle supports at their own discretion, though each was checked by the referee before the fight.\nDecision.\nIf the match reaches its time limit then the outcome of the bout is determined by the three judges. The fight is scored in its entirety and not round-by-round. After the third round, each judge must decide a winner. Matches cannot end in a draw. A decision is made according to the following standard in this order of priority:"}
{"id": "44801", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44801", "title": "University of Tokyo", "text": ", also known as , is a university in Tokyo, Japan.\nHistory.\nThe modern university was established in 1877. It merged older government schools for medicine and Western learning.\nIn 1866, the name was changed to .\nIn 1897, the name became .\nAfter the end of World War II, the early name of the school was restored.\nOrganization.\nThe University of Tokyo has 10 faculties (schools for undergraduate students) and 15 graduate schools.\nResearch Institutes.\nThe University of Tokyo has the following research institutes.\nNotable alumni.\nNational leaders.\nMany prime ministers of Japan have studied at University of Tokyo. \nNovel Prize receivers.\nSeven alumni of University of Tokyo have received the Nobel Prize.\nOthers.\nOther graduates also include Masao Iri, Masatake Mori, Masaaki Sugihara and Toshio Irie."}
{"id": "44808", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44808", "title": "Implicit derivative", "text": "Implicit derivatives are derivatives of implicit functions. This means that they are not in the form of formula_1 (explicit function), and are instead in the form formula_2 (implicit function). It might not be possible to rearrange the function into the form formula_3. To use implicit differentiation, we use the chain rule, \nIf we let formula_5, then, \nExample.\nWhich we can work out to be equivalent to, using the above,\nThen we can isolate formula_10\nThen divide to get, "}
{"id": "44823", "revid": "1094998", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44823", "title": "Howard Carter", "text": "Howard Carter (May 9, 1874 \u2013 March 2, 1939) was an English archaeologist. His mother was Martha Carter and his father was Samuel Carter. As a young man he worked for the Egyptian Antiquities Service. Later, he was the man who found King Tutankhamun's tomb in 1922. \nThe discovery of Tutankhamun's tomb was an accident. Howard Carter's waterboy stumbled across some steps leading under the desert surface. Lord Carnarvon, a sponsor of Carter's work, was impatient of the slow progress at this point, and if the discovery had not been made, then it likely would not have been discovered at all."}
{"id": "44827", "revid": "11132", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44827", "title": "Everton", "text": ""}
{"id": "44828", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44828", "title": "Werder Bremen", "text": "The Sport-Verein Werder von 1899 e. V. Bremen is a German football club playing in the city of Bremen. The club was founded in 1899 as \"FV Werder\" by a group of sixteen high school students. The students had won a football as prize in a tug of war competition. In 1920 the name was changed from FV to SV werder Bremen. In this year chess, baseball, cricket and track and field athletics became part of the club. But football was and still is the most important part of the club.\nThe name \"Werder\" is a not very common regional word which means \"River peninsula\". The first play ground of Werder Bremen was beside the Weser river. Today they play in the Weserstadion.\nThe club's first team plays in the German Bundesliga. The second team of Werder Bremen is playing in Germanys 4th league. The women team is playing in the Second Bundesliga. Their colors are green and white (Gr\u00fcn und Wei\u00df).\nCurrent squad.\n\"Correct as of 25 September 2012\""}
{"id": "44834", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44834", "title": "2004 Redfern riots", "text": "The Redfern Riots on 14 February 2004 were started in the inner Sydney suburb of Redfern after the death of Thomas 'TJ' Hickey, a 17 year old Australian Aborigine. \nThe boy was riding home on his bicycle from his girlfriend's house when he saw a police car and thought it was chasing him. Police were searching him, but police have said that the police car was looking for a different person. While the chase Hickey lost control of his bicycle rode into a spiked fence.\nFriends and relatives came together at The Block to be sad. Fliers were given out, which said that it was the fault of the police that the boy died and unhappy aboriginal youths arrived from other parts of Sydney at the Redfern railway station. The police closed the entrance to the station but the crowd had turned violent and began to throw bottles, bricks and Molotov cocktails. The violence became into a full riot around The Block, during which Redfern railway station was burning for a short time and was heavily damaged. The riot went on into the early morning, until police used Fire Brigade water hoses to get the crowd apart. One car, stolen in a western suburb, was burnt, and 40 police officers were hurt."}
{"id": "44836", "revid": "5804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44836", "title": "Redfern riots", "text": ""}
{"id": "44841", "revid": "593910", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44841", "title": "Fingering", "text": "Fingering means: choosing which finger to use for each note when playing a piece on a musical instrument. When learning to play a piece it is important to try to find a good fingering. Once a good fingering has been found it should always be used so that the piece is always played in the same way and the fingers learn \u201cwhere to go\u201d. Sometimes printed music has some fingering printed above the notes. This can be helpful to the player, but it is not always necessary to use the printed fingering. People\u2019s hands are different and a fingering that is good for one player may not be good for another.\nFingering on keyboard instruments.\nWhen playing keyboard instruments the fingers are numbered from 1 to 5 on each hand: the thumb is 1, the index finger is 2, the middle finger is 3, the ring finger is 4 and the little finger is 5. The fingers were not always numbered like that. In Britain in the 19th century the thumb was shown by a cross (+) and the fingers were numbered from 1 to 4. This was known as \u201cEnglish fingering\u201d while the other way (from 1 to 5) was known as \u201cContinental fingering\u201d. However, from the beginning of the 20th century the British used the normal 1 to 5 (Continental) fingering.\nIdeas about fingering have changed during the history of music. In the Baroque times (17th and early 18th centuries) French composers writing for the harpsichord often fingered scale passages 2 3 2 3 etc. so that the notes were grouped (slurred) in twos. Later this idea went out of fashion. In the early 19th century Carl Czerny wrote lots of studies for piano which helped to exercise all the fingers equally. This is how we learn to play the piano today.\nFingering for the organ is similar to fingering for the piano. However, organists use a lot of \u201cfinger substitution\u201d which means: changing to a different finger while a note is held down. This is useful in music such as hymn tunes which have lots of chords. It helps to make the music legato (smooth): (a pianist can use the right pedal to make chords legato.) An organist playing on the pedals also needs to decide which foot to use for each note. This is called \u201cfooting\u201d. A v sign means: play with the toe, a square u sign means: play with the heel. When these signs are placed above the note it means the right foot, below means for the left foot.\nFingering on string instruments.\nFingering on string instruments will show which position to play in (i.e. how far down the fingerboard the hand is held). The fingers are numbered from 1 to 4 because the thumb is behind the neck of the instrument. The number 0 means: play an open string (not using the finger). It is only the left hand which fingers the notes because the right hand is either plucking or bowing. Bowed instruments like the violin have no markings on the fingerboard, so the player has to get used to the exact place to put the fingers, otherwise it will not be in tune. Plucked instruments such as guitars and banjos have frets (little bumps on the fingerboard) which show where to put the fingers.\nSometimes the fingering printed or written in the music may also need to show which string to play on. A tune that could be played in first position on a D string on the violin could also be played on the G string in fifth position (with the hand much higher up the fingerboard). This is harder to do, but a good player can make it sound particularly warm and beautiful. Sometimes notes can be fingered as harmonics instead of as ordinary stopped notes. This makes them sound very light and airy.\nCellists can also play in \u201cthumb position\u201d if they have several notes which are high and quite near one another. This means putting the thumb high up on the fingerboard, often across two strings.\nThe double bass is so big that the distances between the notes are very big too. To go up from one note to the next (in semitones) they use finger 1, then 2, then 4. Finger 3 is just helping finger 4 to press down on the string. There are a few players who use a different fingering system: using fingers 1, 2, 3, 4. This means that the hand has to stretch a lot. It is difficult to play in tune like this, although it saves having to change the hand position so much.\nHarp fingering.\nHarp music looks like piano music: there are two staves, one which usually has a treble clef for the right hand, the other with a bass clef for the left hand. Some piano music can be played on the harp, but the piano fingering will not work. On a piano, starting with the thumb and going along the fingers to the little finger means going to higher notes in the right hand and to lower notes in the left hand. On the harp it is the other way round (the harpist sits with the high notes nearest to his body). The thumb is numbered 1 and the fingers are 2, 3 and 4. The little finger is not used in harp playing.\nWoodwind fingering.\nIn woodwind instruments there is normally one basic fingering, each note is a particular combination of fingers. However at more advanced levels different fingerings can be used in order to create different effects. Beginners\u2019 books may have a fingering chart to show how to get the different notes. A low F sharp on a descant recorder will be fingered 1 2 3 0 2 3. This means: fingers 1, 2 and 3 of the left hand and fingers 2 and 3 of the right hand. The first hole of the right hand position is left open.\nOn the recorder some of the notes, especially sharps and flats, have complicated fingering. This is called \u201ccross fingering\u201d. The flute, oboe, clarinet and bassoon all have metal keys to help reach the low holes and to make it easier to play the sharps and flats. The usual system for these keys was invented in the 19th century by Theobald B\u00f6hm.\nSometimes there is an \u201calternative fingering\u201d for some notes. This can be used to make it easier to play fast trills, but the usual fingering will sound better for normal notes.\nUsing good fingering.\nGood fingering is fingering which avoids moving the hand up and down unnecessarily. It should also help the music to sound good e.g. legato music for smooth tunes, clear music for fast repeated notes."}
{"id": "44842", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44842", "title": "Rh\u00f6n", "text": "The Rh\u00f6n are a group of low mountains in central Germany, in the states Hesse, Bavaria and Thuringia. They are the product of ancient volcanic activity and are separated from the Vogelsberg Mountains by the Fulda River and its valley. \nThese mountains are a popular tourist attraction. Hikers come for the nearly 6,000\u00a0km (3,750 miles) of tracks through the picturesque scenery, and gliding has been done here since the early Twentieth century. Nowadays people come here to stay on a farm during holidays, too.\nSince 1991, UNESCO has declared the Rh\u00f6n a Biosphere Reserve. \nThe highest mountains of the Rh\u00f6n are:"}
{"id": "44844", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44844", "title": "LZ 129 Hindenburg", "text": "The LZ 129 Hindenburg was a large German airship, built in 1936. It was named in honor of the German field marshal and statesman Paul von Hindenburg. Such airships are called Zeppelin. Along with another Zeppelin, LZ 130 Graf Zeppelin, it was the biggest airship in the world at the time it was built.\nThe Zeppelin gained lots of publicity and became very famous. The boxer Max Schmeling flew on it back to Germany after defeating Joe Louis in the United States. It was also present during the opening ceremony of the 1936 Summer Olympics which were held in Berlin. This attention was part of the Zeppelin company's plan to offer a fleet of their airships for trans-atlantic service. \nThe disaster.\nOn May 6, 1937, the Hindenburg was landing in New Jersey after a transatlantic flight, when it burst into flames. 36 people died and many were injured. The Hindenburg was destroyed by the burning of the hydrogen that was inside it. There are many opinions on what started the fire. \nAn announcer, Herbert Morrison reported the landing and then screamed and said, \"Oh the humanity\" after it caught on fire. Morrison's line is now famous around the world as well as photos and film footage of the disaster.\nThe rock group Led Zeppelin used a picture of the fire for the cover of their self-titled debut album."}
{"id": "44847", "revid": "5400", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44847", "title": "Rh\u00f6n Mountains", "text": ""}
{"id": "44850", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44850", "title": "Vogelsberg Mountains", "text": "The Vogelsberg Mountains are a group of low mountains in central Germany. They are in the middle of the state of Hessen. They are the product of ancient volcanic activity and are separated from the Rh\u00f6n Mountains by the Fulda River and its valley.\nThe Vogelsberg is about 19 million years old. It is Germany's only shield volcano. It is the largest basalt formation of Central Europe. It consists of many layers which fall downward from their peak in ring-shaped terraces to the base.\nThe highest mountains of the Vogelsberg are Taufstein, 773 m (2,536\u00a0ft), and Hoherodskopf, 763 m (2,503\u00a0ft). Both are now in a national park, the Hoher Vogelsberg Nature Reserve."}
{"id": "44852", "revid": "19712", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44852", "title": "Fulda River", "text": "The Fulda is a river in Hesse, Germany. It is one of two headstreams of the Weser River (the other one being the Werra). The Fulda River is 218\u00a0km in length.\nThe source is in the Rh\u00f6n mountains. From here it runs northwards through the Weserbergland hills and finally meets the Werra River close to Hannoversch M\u00fcnden.\nCities along the Fulda River include:"}
{"id": "44853", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44853", "title": "Headstream", "text": ""}
{"id": "44854", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44854", "title": "Emo", "text": "Emo is a kind of music which is short for \"emotive hardcore.\" The style first formed in the mid-1980s, taking the musical sounds of hardcore punk and post-hardcore and combining them with sad and sensitive lyricism (words) that emo has become so well known for.\nIn the mid 1990s, emo incorporated indie rock elements. This ultimately made the emo bands of the 90's much less angry and 'punk-ish' and more dramatic, sometimes even acoustic. Once emo became popular in the 2000s, it became shaped by pop-punk, (a mix of emo and pop punk exists, and is called \"emo-pop\") alternative rock and melodic hardcore.\nThe birthplace of the emo style of music is often said to be Washington, D.C.. This is because the first known emo band, Rites Of Spring, is from that city.\nFashion.\nAs emo entered the mainstream, it became as tied to fashion as to the music genre. The term \"emo\" is associated with wearing skinny jeans, as well as tight T-shirts (usually short-sleeved) or zip-up hoodies which often bear the names of emo bands. Studded belts, converse sneakers, vans, and black wristbands also became associated with emo fashion. Also, thick, horn-rimmed glasses remained in emo fashion. In the mid-2000s, eyeliner and black fingernails became another common thing in emo fashion. The most famous part of emo fashion is the emo hairstyle. The emo hairstyle is flat, straight, and usually jet black hair with long bangs that often will cover a lot of the face. This fashion has at times been characterized as a fad. Emo fashion also has been often confused with goth fashion and scene fashion.\nAs emo became known as a subculture, people who both dressed in emo fashion and associated themselves with the emo music genre have been called \"emo kids\" or \"emos\".\nMusic.\nExamples of bands that emos have been known for listening to are My Chemical Romance, Hawthorne Heights, Silverstein, AFI, Dashboard Confessional, Simple Plan, Brand New, From First to Last, Armor for Sleep, Aiden, Senses Fail, Fall Out Boy, Taking Back Sunday, The Movielife, Death Cab for Cutie, The Used, Alesana, Finch, Panic! at the Disco, and Paramore.\nEmo kids also tend to show high interest in lesser known emo bands, such as Ashestoangels, A Thorn For Every Heart, Dear Whoever and (early) Greeley Estates.\nThree of the bands mentioned above are multi-platinum acts (My Chemical Romance, Fall Out Boy, and Panic at the Disco) and they are known for making \"emo-pop\" music early in their careers. They have, however, protested to belonging to the emo genre.\nCriticism and controversy.\nStereotypes.\nPeople who associate themselves with emo tend to be looked at by society as anxious and emotional. These types of people are looked at by society to be associated with depression, self-harm and suicide. Some people explained the difference between emos and goths by saying that \"emos hate themselves, while goths hate everyone.\"\nSuicide and self harm.\nSome people believe emo is a bad thing. A teenager named Hannah Bond died by hanging herself, blamed by both her mother, Heather Bond, and Hannah's coroner (\"dead body analyst\"). They both believed that emo music caused Hannah to think that suicide is good. They noticed that Hannah appeared to really enjoy the song My Chemical Romance. They noticed that she joined an \"emo cult\", and an image of an emo girl with bloody wrists was shown on her Bebo page. It was reported that Hannah told her parents that her self-harm was an \"emo initiation ceremony\". Heather Bond does not like emo culture: \"There are 'emo' websites that show pink teddies hanging themselves.\" After the results of her dead body are reported on the magazine \"NME\", fans of emo music were complaining that the emo culture did not promote self-harm and suicide. The band My Chemical Romance felt sad about Hannah's death, and spoke verbally that the band is both anti-violence and anti-suicide."}
{"id": "44856", "revid": "6472777", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44856", "title": "Gonadotropin", "text": "Gonadotropins (or Gonadotrophins) are hormones. The two main hormones of the group are Luteinizing Hormone (LH) and Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH). Gonadotropins are hormones that tell the testicles to make sperm or the uterus to release an egg."}
{"id": "44861", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44861", "title": "De Lorean Motor Company", "text": "The DeLorean Motor Company was a car manufacturer formed by John DeLorean in 1975. The company only made one car during its existence - the DMC-12, which has featured in the science fiction series \"Back to the Future\" as a time machine created by Doc Emmett Brown.\nIn 1957, John Z. DeLorean decided to create his own sport car. It was one of his childhood dreams. He created the DeLorean Motors Company near Belfast, Northern Ireland, and his project was helped by the British government. His first car, the DMC-12, was produced in 1981. When the car was publicly launched, the car was a success, and 6,539 DMC-12s were produced in 1981. The car was expensive, and regarded as underpowered for its cost.\nProduction of the DMC-12 continued until 1983, when the DeLorean Motors Company had money problems. John Z. De Lorean was later arrested by police for trafficking cocaine. Production of DeLorean cars was stopped.\nAt present, 6000 De Lorean are used regularly by their owners, and a big majority is in the USA."}
{"id": "44862", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44862", "title": "Gonadotrophin", "text": ""}
{"id": "44864", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44864", "title": "Wedding", "text": "A wedding is the ceremony in which two people become married. It is usually between a man (the bridegroom) and a woman (the bride). Most wedding ceremonies involve an exchange of marriage vows by a couple, presentation of a gift (offering, rings, symbolic item, flowers, money, dress), and a public proclamation of marriage by an authority figure or celebrant. In some places, same-sex weddings are legal. It is common for the couple involved in the wedding to exchange vows and to give each other rings. Weddings are held in religious buildings or other sites such gardens or the home of the bride's parents.\nWedding customs in western societies.\nPre-wedding customs.\nIn the few days or weeks before a wedding, the bride will attend a \"bridal shower\" held in a friend's home. She receives gifts for and advice about married life. The groom will attend a \"bachelor party\" with his groomsmen. This event marks his last night as a bachelor. The party is usually held in a restaurant or club. There is much drinking and merriment. Strippers may entertain. Porn movies may be viewed to educate the groom about his marital responsibilities. A dinner is sometimes held for the parents of the couple. A dinner for all the members of the wedding party is usually held the night before the wedding. \nCeremony.\nA traditional wedding ceremony in the western world usually consists of the couple exchanging vows before a government official such as a justice of the peace or a clergyperson such as a priest, minister, or pastor. Nuns are not permitted to perform marriages. Rings are exchanged between the married couple, following which they kiss.\nSite.\nTraditionally, the bride's church, synagogue, temple, or other religious centre, or the home of her parents is the site of her wedding. Non-traditional couples choose various and unusual sites. Some couples have married while snorkeling or skydiving. Rich couples sometimes choose \"destination weddings\". These couples pay for guests to attend their wedding at a romantic \"destination\" such as a Caribbean island.\nReception.\nThere is often a party or banquet after the wedding called a reception. This is also called the wedding breakfast as it is the first meal the married couple eat together. During the reception, the couple greet friends and family, cut a cake, and have the first dance together. The bride's garter is usually tossed to the groomsmen. The bride's bouquet is tossed to the bridesmaids. The couple depart the reception site in a car that is sometimes decorated with balloons, signs (\"Just Married!\"), old shoes or tin cans tied to the rear bumper.\nDress.\nThe bride usually wears a white dress. White symbolizes virginity. She sometimes wears a thin piece of white cloth on her head called a veil, or a wreath of flowers, a tiara, or other headdress. The groom lifts the veil before or after the vows are taken. The groom is usually dressed in formal attire.\nHoneymoon.\nAfter the wedding, the newlyweds usually take a trip, which is called a honeymoon. Traditionally, the honeymoon was the time when the couple had their first sexual intercourse and established their sexual relationship. Many, many couples in the western world today have had sexual intercourse long before the wedding, and the honeymoon has become a time of intimate relaxation before returning to work, debts, and other obligations.\nWedding Wishes.\nMarriage is the beautiful bond of souls bind together with eternal love, responsibility, rights, and obligations. Marriage is more the living together. It is about duty, commitment, understanding, and many more. From the prehistoric time, it has been the traditions to celebrate the wedding day full of fun, excitements, presents, and beautiful blessings.\nBridesmaids.\nThe bridesmaids are people that walk down the aisle before the bride and her father. They often wear a dress the same colour as the bride's dress and they have a little flower bouquet like the bride.\nBridal shower.\nThe bridal shower is similar to the bachelor party, but it is for the women. "}
{"id": "44865", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44865", "title": "Stargate SG-1", "text": "Stargate SG-1 is a science fiction television program. It takes place after the movie \"Stargate\". The show started on July 27, 1997 on the TV channel \"Showtime\", from 1997-2002, and then on the TV channel \"Sci Fi\", from 2002-2007. The first episode, \"Children of the Gods\" was two hours long and was rated R because of a scene of nudity. It is the only episode in the series that was rated. The show ended with the episode, \"Unending\" on March 13, 2007.\nThe show follows the missions of a secret military operation known as the Stargate Program. It is run out of a base under Cheyenne Mountain, known as Stargate Command (commonly called the SGC). The plot of the show revolves around the flagship team, called SG-1. The team is made up of Colonel Jack O'Neill (Richard Dean Anderson), Dr. Daniel Jackson (Michael Shanks), Major Samantha Carter (Amanda Tapping), and Teal'c (Christopher Judge)."}
{"id": "44867", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44867", "title": "Stargate Atlantis", "text": "Stargate Atlantis is a television series. It is a spin-off of the \"Stargate SG-1\" series. The series starts at the beginning of the eighth season of \"Stargate SG-1\". Mika McKinnon was a science adviser for this show and \"Stargate Universe\".\nStory.\nThe main subject of the seventh season of \"Stargate SG-1\" was researching and locating the city of the Ancients. At the end of the seventh season, SG-1 discovered that the city is on Earth, under the ices of Antarctica. But it was in fact only a beachhead. Doctor Daniel Jackson finds the coordinates of the real city. Its name is Atlantis (the legendary ancient city), and it's in the Pegasus galaxy. The address was hard to find because it needs eight chevrons, the seventh of which is used to indicate the galaxy."}
{"id": "44871", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44871", "title": "Enchilada", "text": "Enchilada is a traditional Mexican dish. The words comes from \"enchilar\", which means \"add Chili peppers to something\". The traditional enchilada sauce mainly consists of Chile peppers. The basis for the enchilada is tortilla, made from maize. After that,a certain kind of meat (usually birds, like chicken or turkey) is added. Some people also add onions and cheese. "}
{"id": "44872", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44872", "title": "Sugar Sugar Rune", "text": "Sugar Sugar Rune(\u30b7\u30e5\u30ac\u30b7\u30e5\u30ac\u30eb\u30fc\u30f3) is a Japanese manga and anime. It tells the story of two young witches who are in a competition together. They are trying to become the new queen of their world.\nStory.\nVanilla and Chocolat are two young witches who are sent in the humans world in order to decide who will become the new queen of their world. Their goal is succeeding in getting colored hearts from boys by being nice to them. When the boys fall in love with them, their feelings turn into a heart that the witches can take with a magic spell. The hearts are different colors for different feelings, such as surprise, love, or jealousy. Each heart can be used like money in their world, and some are worth more than others. Vanilla and Chocolat go to school like regular humans, and they take the hearts of the boys that they see at school and at other places in town. They can also get a heart that represents friendship from other girls, and they learn that it is important for the future Queen to be able to be nice to girls as well as boys. Also, Vanilla and Chocolat are friends, and they decide that they will stay friends no matter who becomes the queen of their world at the end of the competition. \nThere are bad guys in their world, though. They are called Ogres, and they like to make people feel jealous of one another or make people hate each other. They use the \"Black Hearts\" that those bad emotions make as power, and they want to take over the magical world that Vanilla and Chocolat come from. The story shows the competition between Chocolat and Vanilla and how their people handle the Ogres that try to stop their competition. \nMain Characters.\nChocolat Meilleure : (\"Chocolat Kat\u00f4\" in the world of the humans.) Chocolat is a young witch with a lot of charisma. She is funny and not shy at all. Her personality make her liked in her world, but in her new school, the boys prefer a shy girl like Vanilla. She has a quick temper that scares human boys, but she is not truly cruel-hearted. Later on in the story, some of the boys start to like her. Two boys from her own world also like her a lot and want her to be the queen of their world. Chocolat's mother was also in a competition to become the queen before Chocolat was born, but she died when Chocolat was a baby. Chocolat has a crush on Pierre.\nVanilla Mieux : (Vanilla Ice in the world of the humans). Vanilla is the best-friend of Chocolat. She is very shy. She tries to be nice to everyone, but sometimes the boys want her to like them instead of everyone at once. Vanilla's mother is the queen of their world, and she is a very nice person who helps Vanilla and Chocolat from time to time.\nRockin' Robin : Robin is a wizard from Vanilla and Chocolat's world, and the girls in the human world like him a lot. His job is to help Vanilla and Chocolat while they compete to become the queen of their world. He gives them advice about living with humans.\nPierre He is a cold boy who is not innocent as he looks. He is popular with the girls in Chocolat's world, but he is an evil Ogre (an evil race of wizards and witches). He even tries to kill Chocolat once. He has a fan club of pretty, but cruel girls. Eventually, he starts to warm up and Chocolat saves him and he becomes good again. He likes Chocolat romantically. "}
{"id": "44873", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44873", "title": "Byzantine art", "text": "Byzantine art is a form of Christian Greek art of the Eastern Roman Empire from about the 5th century until the Fall of Constantinople in 1453. (The Roman Empire during this period is known as the Byzantine Empire.)\nBut the term can also be for other the art of countries who shared their culture with the Byzantine Empire. This can include Bulgaria, Serbia, and Rus. The Republic of Venice and Kingdom of Sicily, can also be included even though they were part of western European culture. Art produced by Balkan and Anatolian Christians who lived in the Ottoman Empire is often called \"post-Byzantine.\" Certain traditions that began in the Byzantine Empire, particularly icon painting and church architecture, are still current in Greece, Russia and other Eastern Orthodox countries. "}
{"id": "44874", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44874", "title": "Hel (realm)", "text": "Hel is one of the nine worlds of Norse mythology. It is where the mortal dead gather after life if their death was dishonourable. Its ruler is the goddess Hel. Hel is located under the roots of the tree Yggdrasil. It can be reached via the river Gj\u00f6ll. A bridge spans this river which is guarded by the giantess Modgrudr. Garm, a dog, guards the entrance to the castle of Hel. He only lets the dead souls enter however they cannot leave. A rooster is the companion of Garm. Its purpose in the realm of the gods is to wake them for Ragnar\u00f6k, this rooster will also wake the souls of the dead. \nThe dragon Nidh\u00f6gg eats from the corpses of deceased criminals. The wolf Fenrir also joins in on this feast."}
{"id": "44882", "revid": "369566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44882", "title": "Wrigley, Northwest Territories", "text": "Wrigley is a Canadian community in the Northwest Territories.\nIn 2001, 165 people lived there."}
{"id": "44891", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44891", "title": "Stress", "text": "Stress could mean:"}
{"id": "44893", "revid": "264940", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44893", "title": "Orycteropus afer", "text": ""}
{"id": "44894", "revid": "264942", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44894", "title": "Orycteropus", "text": ""}
{"id": "44898", "revid": "264953", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44898", "title": "Orycteropodidae", "text": ""}
{"id": "44899", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44899", "title": "Tubulidentata", "text": ""}
{"id": "44901", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44901", "title": "Tabulating machine", "text": "The tabulating machine was a machine used to make the 1890 United States census. It was made by Herman Hollerith. Hollerith's machine used punched cards to store information with by categorisation."}
{"id": "44903", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44903", "title": "Orcinus", "text": ""}
{"id": "44905", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44905", "title": "FreeBASIC", "text": "FreeBASIC is a programming language like QuickBASIC. It is free and open source. It has many advanced things that other BASIC programming languages do not have. FreeBASIC can make graphical programs or console mode programs. It runs on DOS, Linux, and Microsoft Windows.\nThe FreeBASIC compiler can create itself."}
{"id": "44911", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44911", "title": "Real", "text": ""}
{"id": "44931", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44931", "title": "Bohrium", "text": "Bohrium is a chemical element. At the periodic table of the elements it is at position 107.\nThe element is named in honor of Niels Bohr.\nMendeleev predicted that Bohrium would exist. He called the element eka-rhenium because of its location was near Rhenium in the Periodic Table. The chemistry of bohrium is like the chemistry of rhenium."}
{"id": "44932", "revid": "233259", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44932", "title": "Fermium", "text": "Fermium (symbol Fm) is a chemical element. It has an atomic number of 100, which makes it at position 100 at the periodic table. Fermium cannot be found in nature; it has to be made. Scientists can create it by combining plutonium with neutrons at very high speeds and temperatures. It is named after Enrico Fermi.\nHistory.\nAlbert Ghiorso and other scientists at the University of California, Berkeley first discovered fermium. They found the element in the fallout from the explosion of the first successful hydrogen bomb test. This test was on November 1, 1952. In the fallout, scientists also discovered another new element, Einsteinium. Because of the Cold War, the US military did not allow the scientists to publish their results in a scientific journal. However, they conducted other studies and published their research in 1954. The studies of nuclear fallout were declassified and published in 1955.\nA group in the Nobel Institute for Physics in Stockholm also discovered isotopes of this element before the research of the Berkeley scientists was published. However, most agree that the Berkeley scientists were the first to discover fermium."}
{"id": "44933", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44933", "title": "Potash", "text": "Potash is a generic term for a chemical compound. It means the mixture of potassium hydroxide and potassium carbonate left over in ashes. The wood was burnt to produce ashes, which were dissolved in water. The potash was then reacted with fat to produce soap."}
{"id": "44935", "revid": "127811", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44935", "title": "Broadcaster", "text": "Broadcaster may refer to:"}
{"id": "44947", "revid": "1122404", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44947", "title": "Longitudinal wave", "text": "A longitudinal wave is a wave in which the particle movement is parallel to the direction of the wave propagation. This means that the particles move left and right which in turn makes the other particles start to oscillate. This creates a wave. Longitudinal waves are also called pressure waves, and sound waves are the most common kinds.\nAs with other waves, the particles do not move with the wave. "}
{"id": "44949", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44949", "title": "Southbridge, Massachusetts", "text": "Southbridge is a city in the American state of Massachusetts. The city's nickname is \"The Eye of the Commonwealth\". It has a population of about 18,000. \nSouthbridge has a lot of history and tradition. The city was once home to the largest optical manufacturer in the world: American Optical. American Optical moved somewhere in Mexico where workers would be paid smaller wages. It is now called the Mexican Optical. Southbridge has a great economy. It is often called a mixing pot of cultures. There are many different ethnic groups in Southbridge."}
{"id": "44950", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44950", "title": "Tibetan language", "text": "The Tibetan language is a language spoken in Tibet, a region of China. It is one of the main Han\u2013Tibetan languages. \nIt is also spoken in other parts of the Himalaya region, including northern Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan, and India (Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Ladakh). \nIt has been spoken for many centuries (since at least the 6th century, possibly earlier). \nTibetan has many dialects. People who speak different dialects often cannot easily communicate with each other orally. \nThe Tibetan written language is not known by most Tibetans and is not taught in many Tibetan areas. "}
{"id": "44956", "revid": "1068258", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44956", "title": "Aschaffenburg", "text": "Aschaffenburg (; East Franconian: \"Aschebersch\" ]) is a German city in the west of Franconia. It has a population of about 68,000. It is a part of the European metropolitan area of Frankfurt am Main."}
{"id": "44957", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44957", "title": "Most Valuable Player", "text": "In sports, a Most Valuable Player award is an honour given to the player or players of a team that performed better than the other players throughout a league or contest. It was first used in professional sports, but is now used a lot in amateur sports and other things unrelated to sports, such as business and music awards. A similar award used in sports, often in soccer, is man of the match."}
{"id": "44958", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44958", "title": "Most valuable player", "text": ""}
{"id": "44959", "revid": "86802", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44959", "title": "MVP", "text": "MVP could mean:"}
{"id": "44960", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44960", "title": "Caecum", "text": ""}
{"id": "44964", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44964", "title": "Stoat", "text": "A stoat (\"Mustela erminea)\" is a small mammal of the family Mustelidae. It is also called a short tailed weasel. It is bigger than a weasel. Stoats in their white winter coat are also called ermines. They can grow to be as long as 30 centimeters (a foot long). They eat other small animals and bird eggs, and can kill animals bigger than themselves. They can also store food for later. They kill by biting the neck of their prey at the place where the skull attaches to the rest of the body.\nDescription.\nStoats are long and thin with short legs, small ears, and thick warm fur. Their fur is brown, but changes to white in the winter. The tail has a black tip all year round. The whiskers are brown or white in colour, and very long. Stoats have a good sense of smell, and they hunt using smell. They do not see color as well as humans, but they can see better at night.\nMales are 187\u2013325\u00a0mm (7.4\u201312.8\u00a0in) in length. Females are 170\u2013270\u00a0mm (6.7\u201310.6\u00a0in) in length. The tail is 75\u2013120\u00a0mm (3.0\u20134.7\u00a0in) in males. The tail is 65\u2013106\u00a0mm (2.6\u20134.2\u00a0in) in females. Males weigh 258 grams (9.1\u00a0oz). Females weigh less than 180 grams (6.3\u00a0oz).\nBehavior.\nStoats are largely crepuscular, meaning that they are most active during dawn and dusk, though they spread out their activity in short bursts during the day and night as well.\nStoats can spray a bad smelling fluid when they are scared. They are also good at climbing trees.\nThe stoat does not dig its own burrows. Instead it uses the burrows of the rodents it kills. The skins and underfur of the rodents it kills are used to line the nest chamber. The nest chamber is sometimes found in places that doesn't look like a good place to live in, such as among logs piled against the walls of houses. The stoat also lives in old and rotting stumps, under tree roots, in heaps of brushwood, haystacks, in bog hummocks, in the cracks of empty mud buildings, in rock piles, rock clefts, and even in magpie nests.\nFeeding.\nThe stoat lives by hunting. It usually hunts large rodents and lagomorphs. It will attack animals much larger than itself. In Russia, its prey includes rodents and lagomorphs such as European water voles, common hamsters, pikas. It overpowers them in their burrows. It also eats small birds, fish, and shrews and, more rarely, amphibians, lizards, and insects. In Great Britain, European rabbits are an important source of food. Stoats that live in Great Britain rarely kill shrews, rats, squirrels and water voles, though rats may be an important source of food locally. In Ireland, shrews and rats are frequently eaten. In North America, where the ecological niche for rat and rabbit sized prey is taken by the larger long-tailed weasel, the stoat hunts mice, voles, shrews, and young cottontail. In New Zealand, the stoat mostly feeds on birds, including the rare kiwi, kaka, mohua, yellow-crowned parakeet, and New Zealand dotterel.\nDistribution and Habitat.\nStoats live in temperate, subarctic northern areas. They live in parts of Europe, Asia, and North America. They were brought to New Zealand to kill rabbits. Unfortunately, they also killed many of the native New Zealand birds.\nThe stoat lives throughout North America, Europe, and Asia, from Greenland and the Canadian and Siberian Arctic islands. Stoats in North America are found throughout Alaska and Canada south through most of the northern United States to central California, northern Arizona, northern New Mexico, Iowa, the Great Lakes region, New England, and Pennsylvania, but are absent from most of the Great Plains, and the Southeastern United States. The stoat in Europe is found as far south as in Portugal. It also lives in most islands with the except Iceland, Svalbard, the Mediterranean islands and some small North Atlantic islands. In Japan, it is lives in the central mountains (northern and central Japan Alps) to northern part of Honshu (mainly above 1,200 m) and Hokkaid\u014d.\nReproduction.\nStoats live alone and are territorial. The gestation period is usually around 300 days. After mating in the summer, the kits will not be born until the following spring. Female stoats spend almost all their lives either pregnant or in heat.They mate once a year and have several babies, which are called kits. The kits may not develop for 8\u20139 months after the female becomes pregnant. When weather conditions are good and there is plenty of food, the kits begin to grow and are born within a month. The males do not help raise the babies.\nMales become sexually mature at 10\u201311 months. Females become sexually mature at the age of 2\u20133 weeks whilst still blind, deaf and hairless."}
{"id": "44966", "revid": "937699", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44966", "title": "Icon (disambiguation)", "text": "An icon , from the Greek word for image, is a picture of something holy or divine. Icons in this sense are in use mainly in Eastern Christianity. Look in the article Icon for this meaning.\nIconography is the study of all types of images, such as their history and meaning. This is mostly used in art history. The word can also mean \"symbolism\".\nIn other use, an \"icon\" is a Pictogram for an object, facility, control, political party, government, or something like this. See Icon (secular).\nIcon may also mean:\nIn computing:\nOther uses:"}
{"id": "44968", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44968", "title": "Icon", "text": "An icon (from the Greek language: , \"eikon\", \"image\") is an image, picture, or representation which has a religious meaning. It is a sign or a likeness that stands for a real object or person. Although the word \"icon\" can be used for images of other religions, it is most often used to describe a painting on a wooden panel that has been done in the Orthodox Christian tradition, and may also be used for carved ivory panels and panels of silver or gold. These icons show a holy being such as Jesus, Mary, a saint or an angel. They also show scenes from the Bible such as the Crucifixion and scenes from lives of the saints. In Orthodox Christianity an icon is thought of as a window through which a person can get a view of God's truth. \nHow a Christian Orthodox icon is painted.\nThe traditional way of making an icon was used in Egypt in Early Christian times to make portraits of dead people to use for their funerals. Like icons, these funeral portraits were done on a wooden panel and the paint was mixed with yolk of egg. From the time that Christianity was made legal by Constantine the Great in the early 300s, artists began to use the same method for painting holy pictures. \nIt was always hoped that a painting would last for a long time, so everything had to be very carefully prepared. A board had to be chosen that would not crack or warp (bend), and which did not have any knotty bits that might fall out. The board was sanded smooth and then coated with a gluey paint called \"size\" which would hold the coloured paint well, but stop the expensive colours from being soaked up by the wood. The artist would prepare the paints very carefully. Some of the colours were made from gound-up semi-precious stones. Others were made from chemicals. \nBefore the artist could start on the panel, he had to prepare the design. It was not important for the artist to think of something new and different. It was much more important that he could copy another icon very accurately. The same designs were used over and over. \nAlthough all icons were thought of as a window to Heaven, some icons were believed to have special properties. It was believed that praying and lighting candles before some icons would bring healing, or the help of the saint who was shown in the picture. These icons became very famous and were often copied. \nAfter the artist had drawn the design onto the surface of the size in thin green or brown paint, he would put the paint on in layers, building up the colours bit by bit. Most of the colours were quite transparent and this made the painting look glowing. When the figures were finished the artist would set the work in a wooden frame and \"gild\" it by covering the background with a little pieces of gold leaf that had been beaten into very thin sheets. When a candle was lit near the icon, it shone on the gold surface and made the figures stand out.\nIcons in other religions.\nThroughout history, some religions such as Christianity and Hinduism, have often used images such as paintings and statues, while others, such as Judaism and Islam, do not often use images of people. \nIn Hinduism there is much use of sacred objects because there is a belief in murti, the idea that the Spirit of God can be present in an \"icon\" (or holy object). "}
{"id": "44973", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44973", "title": "Eastern Christianity", "text": "Eastern Christianity means the Christian traditions and churches which developed in Greece, the Balkans, Eastern Europe, Asia Minor, the Middle East, East Africa and southern India over several centuries of religious antiquity. That are especially five families of churches: the Assyrian Church of the East, the Eastern Orthodox Churches, Oriental Orthodoxy, the Eastern Catholic Churches, and Eastern Protestant Christianity.\nOn the other hand, there are the\" Western\" traditions of Christianity which mainly represented by the Latin Rite of the Roman Catholic Church, and most non-Eastern Protestant denominations."}
{"id": "44985", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44985", "title": "Love Hina", "text": "Love Hina is a Japanese manga. It was created by Ken Akamatsu. It tells the story Keitar\u00f4 Urashima. Urashima is a Japanese student who tried to enter the famous university of Tokyo (Todai or Toky\u00f4 Daigaku). \"Love Hina\" exists also as an animated series.\nStory.\nKeitar\u00f4 Urashima is a 19-year-old boy who tries to study at the well known university of Todai. He tried three times and failed. He finally decides to go to the hotel of his aunt, the Hinata Hotel. When he got to the hotel, he found that it has been changed into a girls' hotel. The first time he met the people living in the hotel, they were not very happy to see him. Slowly, they began to accept him, even if he is clumsy and a pervert."}
{"id": "44986", "revid": "1102992", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44986", "title": "Super Nintendo Entertainment System", "text": "The Super Nintendo Entertainment System (often shortened to \"SNES\" or \"Super NES\") is a 16-bit video game console created by Nintendo, released first in 1990. It is the sucessor to the NES. It was called the Super Famicom in Japan, and the Super Comboy in South Korea. The console can display 2D graphics, with some limited support for 3D graphics with the Super FX chip. Super NES games are loaded from a cartridge. The major competitor for the Super Nintendo was the Sega Genesis/Mega Drive, but it also competed with the Panasonic 3D0."}
{"id": "44989", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44989", "title": "Sega Saturn", "text": "The is a 32-bit video game console made by Sega. It was released in Japan on November 22 1994, in the United States on May 11 1995, and in Europe on July 8 1995. Games were released on CD-ROMs. It is followed by the Dreamcast. The Saturn was the first Sega video game console which can display 3D graphics. Accessories were available for the Sega Saturn, including a gun controller which was used to play \"Virtua Cop\", and an analog controller.\nThe console was called Saturn because it was Sega's sixth games console, and Saturn is the sixth planet of the solar system.\nJapanese/French models.\nThe Sega Saturn was quite popular in Japan and/or France, because of the commercial with Segata Sanshiro, a man who devoted his life to the Sega Saturn. The Japanese Sega Saturn was black, and it was later changed to gray.\nEuropean/North American models.\nIn North America, the Saturn was not nearly as popular as it was in Japan and/or France. When it was first released, there were only a few games available, because the console's strange technology made it difficult to program for. That caused the PlayStation to be more popular in Europe. Another problem was that Sega released the Saturn sooner than they intended to, but did not tell shops about the new release date, meaning that many of them did not sell the Saturn at all out of anger. Sega had also made other consoles to try and be the first to use new technology, such as the Sega CD (an early console with games that came on CDs) and the Sega 32X (with better graphics than Sega's previous consoles), leaving some gamers without enough money to buy all three systems or angry at Sega for abandoning the 32X when the Saturn was released."}
{"id": "44998", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44998", "title": "I\u00f0unn", "text": "I\u00f0unn is a goddess in Norse Mythology. She is the goddess of youth, wife of Bragi, god of poetry. She guards the golden apples. These apples are eaten by the Norse gods to let them live until Ragnarok (the battle of the end of the world)."}
{"id": "45001", "revid": "848082", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45001", "title": "GoldenEye 007 (1997 video game)", "text": "GoldenEye 007 is a first-person shooter video game on the Nintendo 64. Its story is based on the 1995 movie \"GoldenEye\". The main character of the game is James Bond, Agent 007. It is a 3D first person shooter style game. Its multiplayer mode is also very popular. The game has received a very positive reception and is often said to be one of the best games ever made.\nIn November 2010, a\u00a0remake\u00a0of the game was released for the\u00a0Nintendo Wii\u00a0and\u00a0Nintendo DS. However, it was not received as positively and it was criticized. \nLevels.\nThere are 20 levels in the game, which are separated into 9 missions. Some missions only have one level while others have many. There are also 2 bonus missions.\nThe game is one of the world's most highly acclaimed first-person shooter games and has been rated highly on many lists. Screwattack.com for instance put it first on its list of top ten first-person shooter games, taking the title away from games like \"Halo\" and \"Half Life 2\"."}
{"id": "45002", "revid": "3650", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45002", "title": "Vibrate", "text": ""}
{"id": "45003", "revid": "3650", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45003", "title": "Horn (instrument)", "text": ""}
{"id": "45008", "revid": "1102631", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45008", "title": "List of dinosaurs", "text": "The following is a list of dinosaurs. Some of them, such as Archaeopteryx, are considered to be birds. Some doubtful Mesozoic birds are included in this list. "}
{"id": "45010", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45010", "title": "Chrismas", "text": ""}
{"id": "45012", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45012", "title": "Oronzio Maldarelli", "text": "Oronzio Maldarelli was an Italian born American sculptor and artist. He was born in 1892. He came to the United States from Naples, Italy as a child. He died in 1963 at the age of 71.\nAt age fourteen, he took lessons in drawing and clay modeling. After two years, he started to study at the National Academy of Design with Leon Kroll, Ivan Olinsky, and Hermon McNeil. In 1912, he entered the Beaux-Arts Institute. It was there that Jo Davidson and Elie Nadelman helped him out. He was a great artist at everything. In 1935, he started doing mostly just sculpture. Maldarelli is best known for sculptures of female forms that have great detail. Some of them took as long as 13 years. In 1941, Maldarelli won the Logan Prize ($500) for a detailed sculpture of a limestone head. He was a teacher at Columbia University for many years, teaching the art of sculpting."}
{"id": "45024", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45024", "title": "Brights", "text": "The Brights is a group that was started by Paul Geisert and Mynga Futrell to make a name that sounds good for people who have views on life based on nature (naturalistic worldviews). They did not like that names like \"atheist\" and \"non-believer\" sounded bad to some people and they wanted a word that sounded better to these people.\nPaul Geisert chose the word \"bright.\" Mynga Futrell says a bright is a person who has views on life that are free of more-than-natural (supernatural) ideas. She says these persons' morals come from their views on life.\nCriticism.\nSome people, both religious and non-religious, do not like the Brights using the word \"bright\" in this way. They believe it suggests that people with views on life based on nature are smarter than those with other views on life. However, this is not why the name was chosen; it tries to show that people with views based on nature are \"looking on the \"bright\" side\" of life."}
{"id": "45027", "revid": "8630", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45027", "title": "Dish", "text": "Dish can mean a plate or pan for food or a kind of food prepared for a meal. \nSome radio antennas are in the shape of dishes."}
{"id": "45029", "revid": "112243", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45029", "title": "Hinge", "text": "A hinge is something that connects two objects and lets them rotate. The most common examples are the hinges that connect doors to walls or door frames. To open a door on hinges, one pushes the side far from the hinges and the door rotates around the side with hinges.\nHinges can be very large or very small. Small hinges are used for jewellery boxes and other small things with lids. Very large hinges have been used at the bottom of buildings, to let a building sit on loose soil or mud without breaking."}
{"id": "45032", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45032", "title": "Visible light", "text": ""}
{"id": "45033", "revid": "2394", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45033", "title": "Shia Halfmoon", "text": ""}
{"id": "45036", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45036", "title": "Instrument", "text": "An instrument can mean several things."}
{"id": "45038", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45038", "title": "Hunt", "text": ""}
{"id": "45039", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45039", "title": "Producer", "text": "A producer is something or somebody that creates one thing or one being.\nEntertainment producers.\nIn the entertainment industry, a producer is a person who makes things happen. The producer is of the person in charge of providing the money and hire people to do the job. It is also the job of the producer to deal with getting whatever is being made out to the public. A movie producer must find people to provide money to make the movie, hire the main actors and director for the movie, and get the movie distributed so that people can see it. Producers are commonly found dealing with movies, television, and music.\nExecutive producer.\nIn large entertainment companies, the title of executive producer is often given to people who provide a large amount of money to get something created. Other executive producers speak for the CEO of the company on how the movie or television program is made.\nIn smaller companies, especially for television series, the executive producer is often the creator of the series. Main writers who have been with the series for a long time are often given the title of executive producer."}
{"id": "45040", "revid": "4992697", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45040", "title": "Italian wine", "text": "Italian wines are those produced in Italy, the oldest wine producing region, and are considered to be among the best wines in the world. Wine is a popular beverage in Italy. Many Italians drink it with every meal and in-between, and offer it to guests as soon as they arrive. \nHistory.\nDepending on the vintage, Italy is the world's largest or second largest producer of wine, along with France (each country is generally the source of around 1/5 of the world's overall production). \nStatistics.\nIn 2005, Italy was second globally, producing about 20% of the global production of wine compared to France, which produced 22%.\nIn 2005, Italy's share in dollar value of table wine imports into the U.S. was 32%, Australia's was 24%, and France's was 20%. Italian and Australian share has rapidly increased in recent years.\nSource.\nGrapes are grown in almost every part of Italy, with more than 1 million vineyards under cultivation. Each region is proud of its carefully tended, neatly pruned vines.\nItalian wines tend to be acidic, dry, light-to-medium bodied, with lots of flavour and smell. Because of these characteristics, Italian wines are, in general, better drunk with food than they are beverages to be enjoyed on their own.\nVineyards.\nIn some places the vines are trained along low supports. In others they climb as slender saplings. The people of each region are also proud of the wine they make from their own grapes. \nWinemaking.\nMost winemaking in Italy is done in modern wineries. But villagers, you need to stick a banana on your head for being proper while making wine for their own use, sometimes tread the grapes with their bare feet until the juice is squeezed out. They believe this ancient method still makes the best wine. "}
{"id": "45043", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45043", "title": "SG Essen", "text": "The SG Essen (German: Startgemeinschaft Essen) is a swimming club in Essen (North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany). It is a union of the swimming sections of 13 sports clubs. The SG Essen is one of the most successful swimming clubs in West Germany. The women's team is in the first Bundesliga (national league), the men's team in the second.\nThe SG Essen's breaststroke swimmers are well known: Mark Warnecke, Anne Poleska, and Rebecca Horstmann. The chief trainer is Horst Melzer."}
{"id": "45053", "revid": "7082181", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45053", "title": "Western civilization", "text": "Western civilization, western culture or the West is made up of European culturally derived societies (most notably in the Classical Roman heritage,Western Christianity (Catholicism and Protestantism), Democracy and Liberalism). This at least includes Western and Central Europe, English speaking North America, Australia and New Zealand. The identities of places such as Latin America, South Africa, Israel, the Philippines and Singapore are disputed due to those countries being a blend of both western and non western cultures. \nUntil the process of secularization in the west began with the Age of Enlightenment in the 17th century, Western civilization was also called Christendom meaning the area where the Christian religion is in the majority (a view held by historian Arnold Toynbee). By this definition, most parts of Africa would now also be part of Western civilization since many Africans have been converted to Christianity since the 1950s.\nWesternization is the transformation of a non western culture to Western standards, with historical examples being the Romanization of \"barbarian\" europe in the classical period, the Hispanization of South America, Central America and the Philippines in the 1500s, the Anglicization of North America and Australia in the 1700s, the Francization of North and West Africa in the 1800s and the current Americanization of many first world nations such as Singapore and Israel through Hollywood/ American popular culture. \nThough there are many supporters of westernization, there are also many people who oppose it it expanding at the expense of local cultures. "}
{"id": "45054", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45054", "title": "Goldeneye 007 the video game", "text": ""}
{"id": "45055", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45055", "title": "Iounn", "text": ""}
{"id": "45060", "revid": "1153456", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45060", "title": "E (mathematical constant)", "text": " is a number. It is the base of natural logarithm and is about 2.71828. It is an important mathematical constant. The number is occasionally called Euler's number after the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler, or Napier's constant in honor of the Scottish mathematician John Napier who introduced logarithms. It is equally important in mathematics as \u03c0 and i. is an irrational number, and Euler himself gave the first 23 digits of .\nThe number has great importance in mathematics, as do 0, 1, , and . All five of these numbers are important and occur again and again in mathematics. The five constants appear in one formulation of Euler's identity. Like the constant , is also irrational (it cannot be represented as a ratio of integers) and transcendental (it is not a root of any non-zero polynomial with rational coefficients).\nThe number is very important for exponential functions. For example, the exponential function applied to the number one, has a value of .\n was discovered in 1683 by the Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli, while he was studying compound interest. The numerical value of truncated to 20 decimal places is:\nAlternate definitions of.\nThere are many different ways to define . Jacob Bernoulli, who discovered , was trying to solve the problem:\nIn other words, there is a number that the expression formula_2 approaches as \"n\" becomes larger. This number is .\nAnother definition is to find the solution of the following formula:"}
{"id": "45062", "revid": "6770530", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45062", "title": "Monster (disambiguation)", "text": "A monster is often a type of creature.\nThe term monster can also mean:"}
{"id": "45069", "revid": "43555", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45069", "title": "Platelet", "text": "A platelet is a cell fragment that circulates in the blood. Platelets are involved in hemostasis through the making of blood clots. A low platelet count (number of platelets in the blood) can cause a person to bleed without their blood clotting (making scabs). A high platelet count can increase the risk of thrombosis (blood clots inside blood vessels), which stops blood from flowing properly.\nAnatomy.\nPlatelets do not have a cell nucleus. They are disc-shaped, and are 1.5 to 3 micrometers in diameter. The body does not have a lot of platelets, so they can all be used up quickly. They contain RNA, a canalicular system, and several different types of granules; lysosomes (containing acid hydrolases), dense bodies (containing ADP, ATP serotonin and calcium) and alpha granules (containing fibrinogen, factor V, vitronectin, thrombospondin and von Willebrand factor), the contents of which are released when the platelet is activated."}
{"id": "45070", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45070", "title": "Millilitre", "text": ""}
{"id": "45071", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45071", "title": "Eastern Europe", "text": "Eastern Europe is the eastern region of Europe. Originally, it referred to the countries that were under the influence of the Eastern Orthodox Church in Constantinople during the middle ages, which was in contrast to the West which referred to the countries under the influence of the Roman Catholic and later Protestant Churches. Later during the Cold War it meant the European countries that belonged to the Soviet Union, a definition that still persists today in these post-soviet states. Others describe Eastern Europe as a region of predominantly Slavic cultures, though other ethnic groups live there as well. Eastern Europe has a large Roma gypsy population.\nAccording to the widest contemporary definitions - including those used by the UN Statistics Division, several other UN organizations and EuroVoc (the multilingual thesaurus of the EU) - the following states are in Eastern Europe:\nPartly recognized:\nAlternatives.\nSince January 1993 some groups have changed their definitions of Eastern Europe. Although the list above is still the most popular and widely accepted definition of this region, some experts divide the region further into subsections. According to such theories: the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia are in Central Europe (the western sections of Belarus and Ukraine are also sometimes listed as Central European) or East-Central Europe. Finally, the countries of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania and Slovenia are occasionally grouped with a number of other countries into Southern Europe, but more often referred to as Southeast (or Southeastern) Europe."}
{"id": "45072", "revid": "7844688", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45072", "title": "Eastern Bloc", "text": "The term Eastern Bloc referred to the former Communist states of Central and Eastern Europe, including the countries of the Warsaw Pact, along with Yugoslavia and Albania, which were not aligned with the Soviet Union after 1948 and 1960 respectively. The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON) arranged economic cooperation among the members. Although officially independent countries, they were Soviet satellite states.\nCommunist governments were initially installed, mostly in places that had been controlled by the Axis countries and occupied due to the victories of the Soviet Union on the Eastern Front (World War II). The process included extensive political and media controls, along with a Soviet approach to restricting emigration. Events such as the split of Josip Broz Tito and Berlin Blockade prompted stricter control. While certain oppositional factions in the Bloc had revolts, such as the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, Mikhail Gorbachev's perestroika experienced inefficiencies and stagnation throughout much of the Bloc preceding the Bloc's dissolution. Counterrevolutions in 1989 dissolved the Soviet Bloc.\nA 2009 Pew Research Center poll showed that 72% of Hungarians and 62% of both Ukrainians and Bulgarians felt that their lives were worse off after 1989, when free markets were made dominant. A follow-up poll by Pew Research Center in 2011 showed that 45% of Lithuanians, 42% of Russians, and 34% of Ukrainians approved of the change to a market economy."}
{"id": "45078", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45078", "title": "History of video games", "text": ""}
{"id": "45091", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45091", "title": "Truthiness", "text": "Truthiness is a word used by Stephen Colbert. It was first used on October 17, 2005 in the first episode of the television show \"The Colbert Report\". The word is used to describe something that feels truthful. Facts and logic have nothing to do with truthiness. The truthiness of something is only measured by it instinctively feeling correct.\nThe word was picked as the word of the year for 2005 by the American Dialect Society on January 6, 2006. It was also selected by the Merriam-Webster dictionary on December 10, 2006 as its 2006 Word of the Year. It beat the term \"google\" to get Word of the Year.\nColbert on Truthiness.\nOn the October 5 2005 Cobert Report, Stephen Colbert has this to say about truthiness:"}
{"id": "45096", "revid": "1141870", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45096", "title": "Multi-core processor", "text": "A multi-core CPU is a computer processor which has two or more sections. Each section of the chip executes instructions as if it was a separate computer. The actual processors are still on one chip. On this chip every core looks mostly like the other. They are several mostly independent cores which work together in parallel. A dual-core processor is a multi-core processor with two independent microprocessors. A quad-core processor is a multi-core processor with four independent microprocessors. As you might be able to tell from the prefix, the name of the processor is based on the number of the microprocessors on the chip.\nHistory.\nIn the 20th century most computers used single-core processors and not multi-core processors. Multi-core solutions were only used in unusual cases. The usual way to make a computer faster was to increase the clock rate. But at a frequency about 4\u00a0GHz the CPU would get too hot and take a lot of electricity. This was the point when multi-core processors became more important. Therefore, the demand for multi-core processors increased. In the second half of 2006 the best processors were dual-core processors. Since 2006 the development has gone on, so that the new processors get four, eight, or more independent microprocessors. Today, single-core processors are not used in new personal computers, but they remain popular in embedded systems which do not need a fast processor.\nOperating System Support.\nThe following operating systems support multi-core processors"}
{"id": "45104", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45104", "title": "Western Bloc", "text": "The Western Bloc during the Cold War means the powers allied with the United States and NATO against the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact. \nSoviet Union and the Warsaw Pact were called the \"Eastern Bloc\". This term was rather common, while the governments and press of the Western Bloc used to speak of themselves as the \"Free world\". "}
{"id": "45106", "revid": "922911", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45106", "title": "Free world", "text": "The Free World is a term that was used during the era of the Cold War. It was often used by non-communist nations to describe themselves. It was used to describe the greater personal freedom that the people of non-communist countries (such as the United States and European democratic countries) had compared to the communist Soviet Union and its Communist Bloc allies. \nOn the other hand, many of the non-communist countries that were allied with the \"Free World\" during the Cold War repressed people and sometimes had dictators as their leaders. This included countries in South America, Asia and Africa.\nThe President of the United States was often called the \"leader of the Free World\". This was very common especially in the United States itself. The President of the U.S. is sometimes still called this.\nNeil Young sang a song called \"(Keep on) Rockin' in the Free World\"."}
{"id": "45109", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45109", "title": "Platelets", "text": ""}
{"id": "45114", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45114", "title": "2006 Dublin riots", "text": "The 2006 Dublin riots were a series of riots. They happened in Dublin, Ireland on 25 February 2006. The riots happened after the Gardai (police) tried to move a crowd(large group of people) of people who were blocking the road as a protest against a unionist demonstration. Fourteen people where hurt in the riots. Six of the people hurt were police."}
{"id": "45115", "revid": "7399483", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45115", "title": "List of acronyms and initialisms", "text": "X.\nXWD - Cross Wheel Drive"}
{"id": "45116", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45116", "title": "List of acronym and initialism", "text": ""}
{"id": "45117", "revid": "7682790", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45117", "title": "Warsaw Pact", "text": "The Warsaw Pact, officially the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance, was an organization of Central and Eastern European Communist states. The states were all allies and would fight together if one of them was attacked. While in theory all the countries in the organisation were equals, the smaller countries were controlled by the Soviet Union. \nIt was established in 1955 in Warsaw, Poland in response to West Germany joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization(NATO). The treaty was signed in Warsaw, on 14 May 1955 and official copies were made in the languages of Russian, Polish, Czech and German. The Pact lasted until the end of the Cold War when some members quit in 1991, following the collapse of the Eastern bloc and political changes in the Soviet Union.\nMembers.\nAll the Communist states of Central and Eastern Europe signed except Yugoslavia. \nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "45118", "revid": "1041253", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45118", "title": "Central Europe", "text": "Central Europe is the region around the Alps and Carpathian Mountains lying between the areas of Eastern and Western Europe. The understanding of the concept of \"Central Europe\" varies considerably from nation to nation, and also has from time to time. \nThe region usually means: \nAlternative Definitions.\nIf one were to divide the continent of Europe into two halves like it was during the Cold War, the Iron Curtain would subsequently split the mainstream definition of \"Central Europe\" in half. When using this definition, the countries of Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia would be included in Eastern Europe: whereas the countries of Austria, Germany, Liechtenstein and Switzerland would be considered Western Europe instead. Some experts consider this definition outdated, but many still use them. Supranational organizations like the UN and EU also make use of them.\nIn addition, other countries such as Croatia and the Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia can be included in \"Central Europe\": though they are now mostly considered a part of either Southern Europe or Northern Europe respectively."}
{"id": "45120", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45120", "title": "Four-wheel drive", "text": "A Four-wheel drive (also called 4WD and 4x4) is a vehicle on which all four wheels get power from the engine to move forward. This is as opposed to a two-wheel drive vehicle. 4WDs are often used off road. Part-time and full-time four wheel drive vehicles uses a transfer case as part of the drivetrain to direct power to one or both axles. By having a transfer case the driver can shift the vehicle into either \"two-wheel-drive\" or \"four-wheel-drive\" mode (part-time systems). Many transfer cases also have a low power range that multiplies the engine power when in four-wheel drive (called four-wheel low gear). \nTypes.\nThere are basically four types of four-wheel drive.\nPart-time 4-wheel drive.\nPart-time systems are the most basic type. They are also still the most popular type for using off-road. The can be shifted (mechanically or electrically) from two-wheel drive to four-wheel drive. This gives them the versatility to operate both on and off-road. When the four-wheel drive system is engaged, the two axles turn at the same speed. There usually is no center differential. For that reason part-time four-wheel drive should not be used on dry pavement. If operated for any distance on dry pavement tire damage and drivetrain damage is very possible. Because it operates off-road, the vehicle typically has a higher Ride height. This is to go over obstacles on uneven ground without damage. Even when operated in two-wheel drive on-road, this system will not get the fuel economy of a comparable two-wheel drive vehicle. Locking hubs are available on some models. They help to get better fuel mileage by disengaging the front axle differential.\nFull-time 4-wheel drive.\nThis is the original four-wheel drive. It was and still is designed for serious off-roading. Common on full-time four-wheel drives are locking differentials. These prevent one wheel slipping on the same axle if the other has traction. These systems do not get good gas mileage due to their typical weight. \nAll-Wheel Drive.\nAll-wheel drive (AWD) uses a center differential to direct a percentage of the power to both axles, depending on conditions. All wheel drive is not designed specifically to go off road but is for traction in rain, snow or ice on the road. Body-on frame SUVs are typically designed for off-road use. Unibody crossovers are usually only equipped with the lighter-duty all-wheel drive. However the unibody built Grand Cherokee and newly designed Durango are available with four-wheel drive.\nPart-Time All-Wheel Drive.\nPart-time All-wheel drive (AWD) operate as a front-wheel drive under normal conditions. When traction is lost for any reason, the system automatically sends a portion of the engine's power to the rear wheels. As soon as the system detects good traction, it disengages the rear wheels and shifts back to front drive. This is a less expensive system that adds less weight to the vehicle (usually a car). This makes it popular on compact vehicles. It typically gets better fuel economy than all-wheel drive vehicles. They do not have a low range or a transfer case.\nReferences.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "45121", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45121", "title": "4WD", "text": ""}
{"id": "45122", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45122", "title": "4x4", "text": ""}
{"id": "45125", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45125", "title": "Pride (Combative sports)", "text": ""}
{"id": "45126", "revid": "6881", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45126", "title": "LASER", "text": ""}
{"id": "45131", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45131", "title": "2D", "text": "2D or two-dimensional objects have two measurements: width and length, like a square. Two-dimensional objects do not have depth, like a cube. It's a mathematics tool, but it's also used in video games, and computer science. \nThroughout maths, it is used in geometry and other categories.\nIn video games, it is used as a perspective, like in Grand Theft Auto 1 and 2."}
{"id": "45137", "revid": "7835200", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45137", "title": "Microraptor", "text": "Microraptor is a basal theropod related to \"Velociraptor\" and \"Deinonychus\". It had flight feathers, and could glide and probably fly. About two dozen well-preserved fossil specimens have been found in Liaoning, China. They are from the Lower Cretaceous Jiufotang Formation, 125\u00a0million years old. \nAdult specimens are 42\u201383\u00a0centimeters (1.4\u20132.7\u00a0ft) long, so \"Microraptor\" was one of the smallest dinosaurs.\nFlight.\nContext.\n\"Microraptor\" is one of a number of 'dinobirds' found in the same area of China. They were buried in volcanic ash during huge eruptions.\nDetails.\n\"Microraptor\" was among the first non-avian dinosaurs discovered with the impressions of feathers and wings. Three specimens of \"M. zhaoianus\" have been described in detail, in addition to two specimens of \"M. gui\" and three specimens of \"M. sp.\" described by Xu and colleagues in 2003, from which most feather impressions are known.\nUnusual even among early birds and feathered dinosaurs, \"Microraptor\" is one of the few known bird precursors to sport long flight feathers on its feet as well as its forearms and hands. This led Xu Xing to describe it as a \"four winged dinosaur\", and to speculate that it may have glided using all four limbs for lift. Their bodies had a thick covering of feathers. A diamond-shaped fan on the end of the tail gave stability during flight. \nSankar Chatterjee found that, in order for \"Microraptor\" to glide or fly, the fore and hind wings must have been on different levels (as on a biplane) and not overlaid (as on a dragonfly). Using this biplane model, he calculated possible methods of gliding, and determined that \"Microraptor\" most likely launched itself from a perch, swooped downward in a deep 'U' shaped curve and then lifted again to land on another tree. The feathers not directly employed in the biplane wing, like those on the tibia and the tail, could have been used to control and alter the flight path. The hind wings would also have helped control the gliding flight. \nChatterjee also used computer algorithms to test whether or not \"Microraptor\" was capable of true, powered flight, in addition to gliding. The data showed that \"Microraptor\" could sustain some level powered flight, so it is possible that the animal flew as well as glided."}
{"id": "45140", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45140", "title": "Opera (web browser)", "text": "Opera is a web browser that formerly included e-mail, webfeed reader, and IRC Chat. There are versions available for several operating systems. These include Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, Solaris, FreeBSD, and Linux. There are also version for mobile phones, personal digital assistants, game consoles, and interactive televisions.\nOpera is developed by Opera Software which is based in Oslo, Norway.\nHistory.\nOpera was created in 1994 at Telenor, which is Norway's largest telecommunications company. In 1995, Opera became its own company called Opera Software ASA.\nOpera was first released publicly with version 2.0 in 1996, which only ran on Microsoft Windows. With the release of Opera 4.0 in the year 2000, other operating systems were supported."}
{"id": "45142", "revid": "11594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45142", "title": "Opera (Internet Suite)", "text": ""}
{"id": "45149", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45149", "title": "Orange", "text": "Orange can mean:\nPlaces in the United States:\nPlaces in South Africa:\nOther places in the world:"}
{"id": "45150", "revid": "7889666", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45150", "title": "Orange (fruit)", "text": "The term orange may refer to a number of citrus trees that produces fruit for people to eat. Oranges are a very good source of Vitamin C. Orange juice is an important part of many people's breakfast. The \"sweet orange\", which is the kind that are most often eaten today, grew first in South and East Asia but now grows in lots of parts of the world.\nOranges are round orange-coloured fruit that grow on a tree which can reach 10 metres (33\u00a0ft) high. Orange trees have dark green shiny leaves and small white flowers with five petals. The flowers smell very sweet which attracts many bees.\nAn orange has a tough shiny orange skin that holds acid in outside layer. Inside, the fruit is divided into \"segments\", which have thin tough skins that hold together many little sections with juice inside. There are usually ten segments in an orange, but sometimes there are more or less. Inside each segment of most types of orange there are seeds called \"pips\". Orange trees can be grown from pips, but some types of orange trees can only be grown from \"cuttings\" (a piece cut off a tree and made to grow roots). The segments and the skin are separated by white stringy fibrous material called \"pith\". In most types of oranges, the skin can be peeled off the pith, and the segments can be pulled apart with the fingers to be eaten. In some oranges it is hard to take the skin off. Orange skin is often called \"orange peel\".\nOranges are an important food source in many parts of the world for several reasons. They are a commonly available source of vitamin C. They last longer than many other fruits when they are stored. They are easy to transport because each orange comes in its own tough skin which acts as a container. They can be piled into heaps or carried in bags, lunchboxes and shipping containers without being easily damaged.\nThe colour orange takes its name from the fruit. The word \"orange\" is unusual because it is one of only a few English words that do not rhyme with anything.\nThe orange is particularly used in Asia for wide variety of purposes including cosmetic as well as medicinal. Doctors prescribe oranges for people who suffer from diabetes [citation needed].\nHistory.\nSweet orange trees were brought to Italy, Spain and Portugal from India in the fifteenth century (1400's). Before that time only sour oranges were grown in Italy. The name is from a Tamil word, via Persian and Arabic. From Europe, orange trees were taken to the United States, South America, Africa and Australia, which all grow oranges for sale.\nThere are several different types of sweet oranges. One of the most common types is called the \"Valencia\" orange, which comes from Spain and is also grown in Africa and Australia. It is one of the most important \"commercial\" oranges. (This means that it is grown for sale in shops.)\nOne type of sweet orange is called the \"blood orange\" or \"sanguine orange\" (sanguine means blood red). These oranges often have red marks on the skin, and some parts of the inside look as if they have blood in them. Some blood oranges make juice that is ruby red.\nIn the 1850s, in Brazil, a tree growing in a monastery garden was making very odd fruit. Inside each orange skin there was a large orange with no seeds. At the bottom of the orange were smaller sections that looked like a smaller squashed orange inside the same skin, which was really the bigger orange's twin. The little orange made a strange bump at the bottom of the orange skin, that looked just like a human navel or belly button. These oranges were named \"Navel Oranges\". They tasted very sweet, they had no seeds and they peeled quite easily. This made them a very good orange to grow commercially. But they could not grow from seed. They could only grow from plant cuttings. Nowadays, thousands of these orange trees have been planted from cuttings. \"Navel Oranges\" are grown in California and exported to many countries of the world. Every navel orange in the world has the same genetic make up as the oranges on that tree in the monastery in Brazil.\nMandarins, small flattened oranges with skins that come off easily, are believed to have come from China. Now there are several varieties. These include tangerines, which are redder than most mandarins, and clementines, which are large, smooth and plump. Mandarins of all sorts are very useful lunchbox fruit, because they are easy to peel and eat, but do not get squashed easily.\nNowadays, many people of the world eat an orange or drink orange juice every day, because oranges are one of the best and cheapest sources of Vitamin C. Human bodies, unlike many other animals, do not manufacture Vitamin C, so a human needs vitamin C in their diet regularly. (Vitamin C helps the body to grow, to heal wounds and fight infection.) Oranges are also a very good source of dietary fibre. But they do not contain high amounts of minerals. If a person eats an orange and a banana together, then they have had a very nourishing snack that supplies both vitamins and minerals. Oranges are sweet and juicy."}
{"id": "45151", "revid": "7882057", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45151", "title": "Diplodocus", "text": "Diplodocus was a huge dinosaur from the same time as the \"Allosaurus\". It lived during the Upper Jurassic period, about 145 to 155 million years ago. It was a vegetarian, eating mostly leaves with its peg-like teeth.\nSize.\n\"Diplodocus\" was a long-necked, whip-tailed giant and could grow up to 30 m long. It had an 10 m long neck and 20 m long tail. Its weight was approximately 22,680 kg. It had a short 6\u00a0ft long head. Its size helped protect it from other dinosaurs. It used its long neck to poke into forests because its body was too big. It is also believed to have knocked the trees down. The longest species is the \"hallorum\", which was thought to be the longest of all dinosaurs (now \"Amphicoelias\").\nFossils.\n\"Diplodocus\" skeletons are among the longest dinosaur skeletons ever found. Fossils were discovered in Western North America, particularly in the Rocky Mountains of the western USA. A complete tail has never been found.\n\"Seismosaurus\".\n\"Seismosaurus\" was thought to be its own genus of dinosaur. In 2004 and 2006 it was decided to be a large species of \"Diplodocus\". It is now known as \"Diplodocus hallorum\".\n\"Seismosaurus\" was the longest animal ever known, but paleontologists found they had misplaced vertebrae, making the body too long. Current length estimates are 33\u201336 metres long. Weight estimates vary from 40 to 60 tonnes. Weight estimates of other \"Diplodocus\" species are much lower: 10 to 17 tonnes."}
{"id": "45153", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45153", "title": "Wash", "text": "Wash could mean:"}
{"id": "45155", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45155", "title": "Onion", "text": "Onions are vegetables. They are plants in the genus \"Allium\". When people talk about onions, they usually mean \"garden onions\". Most species of onions have bulbs that people can eat. They have a strong flavour and a very distinctive smell. \nOnions have been grown for a very long time. They were probably first grown in Ancient Egypt, together with leek and garlic, but maybe earlier. Now, most of the world's cultures eat onions.\nCultivation.\nFarmers and gardeners can grow onions from seeds or from bulbs. If they plant seeds, they must later pull out most of the young plants so the rest can grow better. This is called 'thinning.' A different way to plant onions is to plant young bulbs. This is faster, but the onions that grow this way are weaker than the onions that started as seeds.\nIn food.\nOnions can be eaten in different ways: \nWhy onions make eyes water.\nWhen you cut an onion, you open some cells of the onion. Then, some chemicals react. When one chemical floats through the air and reaches your eyes, they sting.\nThere are ways to keep the chemical away. You can:\u3000"}
{"id": "45166", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45166", "title": "Universal House of Justice", "text": "The Universal House of Justice is the name of a council that leads the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed community. It was described by the person who made the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith, Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, in his books and letters. He called it the Supreme House of Justice. His son, `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 called it the Universal House of Justice, because it was going to lead all of the Bah\u00e1'\u00eds. There will be other \"Houses of Justice\" for each country and city, but for now these are called \"Spiritual Assemblies.\" \nBah\u00e1'\u00eds vote for the members of this council every five years during a special festival held between April 20 and May 2. "}
{"id": "45173", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45173", "title": "Puebla (city)", "text": ""}
{"id": "45179", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45179", "title": "Logitech", "text": "Logitech (sometimes shortened to Logi) is a Swiss company that makes electronics. They are best known for making peripheral equipment for computers, including webcams, keyboards and computer mice.\nMice.\nThe first mice were made in Switzerland. Now Logitech makes its items all over the world. Selling computer mice made Logitech a big company. In 2008, Logitech made its billionth mouse.\nProduct lines.\nAs well as webcams, keyboards and mice, Logitech also makes other products such as:\nLogitech has also made two computer games: \"Jelly Jumper\" and \"Jelly Battle\"."}
{"id": "45181", "revid": "7466876", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45181", "title": "Bacteriophage", "text": "A bacteriophage is a virus that infects bacteria. The term is commonly shortened to phage.\nBacteriophages are among the most common and diverse entities in the biosphere. Like viruses that infect eukaryotes (plants, animals, and fungi) there are many different phage structures and functions.\nThe top of phages is made up of a dice-like shape which has 20 sides and 30 edges. Inside it contains the genetic information, which is its DNA. This dice-like shape often sits on a tail that has leg-like fibres.\nPhages are typically made of an outer protein hull that has genetic material inside it. The genetic material may be single-stranded (ssRNA or ssDNA), or double-stranded (dsRNA or dsDNA). It may be between 5,000 to 500,000 base pairs long with either circular or linear arrangement. Bacteriophages are usually between 20 and 200 nanometers in size.\nPhage genomes may code for as few as four genes, and as many as hundreds of genes. Phages have a life cycle that begins when the phage attaches to the bacterium. Then they inject their genome into the bacterium. The genome uses the parts of the bacterium to replicate inside it. When there are many phages inside the bacterium, they put enzymes in the bacterium that weaken the outer cell wall so they can burst through it to infect new bacterias.\nPhages are everywhere there are bacteria, such as soils or the intestines of animals. They are very common in sea water: up to 9\u00d7108 virions per milliliter have been found in microbial mats at the surface, and up to 70% of marine bacteria may be infected by phages.\nThey have been used for over 90 years as an alternative to antibiotics in the former Soviet Union and Central Europe, as well as in France. However, it was not until the first phage was observed under an electron microscope by Helmut Ruska in 1939 that its true nature was established. \nThey are a possible therapy against antibiotic resistant strains of many bacteria. On the other hand, some phages complicate biofilms involved in pneumonia and cystic fibrosis. They shelter the bacteria from drugs and so prolong the infection."}
{"id": "45182", "revid": "555269", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45182", "title": "Deconstruction", "text": "Deconstruction is a way of understanding how something was created, usually things like art, books, poems and other writing. Deconstruction is breaking something down into smaller parts. Deconstruction looks at the smaller parts that were used to create an object. The smaller parts are usually ideas. \nSometimes deconstruction looks at how an author can imply things he does not mean. It says that because words are not precise, we can never know what an author meant.\nSometimes deconstruction looks at the things the author did not say because he made assumptions. \nOne thing it pays attention to is how opposites work. (It calls them \"binary oppositions.\") It says that two opposites like \"good\" and \"bad\" are not really different things. \"Good\" only makes sense when someone compares it to \"bad,\" and \"bad\" only makes sense when someone compares it to \"good.\" And so even when someone talks about \"good,\" they are still talking about \"bad.\" But this is just one thing it does.\nBecause of things like this, deconstruction argues that books and poems never just mean what we think they mean at first. Other meanings are always there too, and the book or poem works because all of those meanings work together. The closer we look at the writing, the more we find about how it works, and how meaning works for all things. If we deconstructed everything, we might never be able to talk or write at all. But that does not mean deconstruction is useless. If we deconstruct some things, we can learn more about them and about how talking and writing work.\nSlippery Words.\nWords are made up of 'signifiers', or the sounds/spellings, and the 'signified', or the meaning and concepts they are talking about. However, the meaning of a word is naturally ambiguous; the word in itself and the meaning are not naturally linked. The word 'band' can refer to an elastic band, a pop music group, a gathering of brass musicians or a collection of people, each with separate connotations and mental images. This means it is the reader who will choose the meanings of words. In a similar way, reading is like trying to hold a wet fish, because there are a variety of meanings to each word. Jacques Derrida calls this \"slippage along the chain of signifiers.\" \nThe chain of signifiers is a long chain of words that are interrelated, for instance a chain might look like this: \"band, brass, copper, police.\" This chain really has no end, because each word connects to many others, and the more slippery a word, the more words it relates to. \nImportant people.\nDeconstructionists question language and meaning. Some people who were very close to Derrida are usually called deconstructionists. These people include Helene Cixous and Jean-Luc Nancy. If someone really deconstructed everything, he or she could not talk or think! Instead there are people who deconstruct things (books, poems, writing, words - in short, texts). Jacques Derrida began deconstructing things in the 1960s, but he was not the first. Martin Heidegger had talked about deconstruction in 1927 with \"Being and Time\" but he used the word \"destruktion\". Heidegger might even say that he got the idea from Ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle. Other important people who talked about it include Paul de Man and Judith Butler."}
{"id": "45184", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45184", "title": "Nihilism", "text": "Nihilism is a way of thinking which rejects concepts, meaning, or life. It is a or condition. Nihility means \"nothingness\", and \"\" is the Latin word for \"nothing\". Nihilism can mean the belief that values are meaningless ideas. It can also mean the belief that nothing has any meaning or purpose. In fact, there are many different beliefs that can be called nihilism. The German thinker Friedrich Nietzsche wrote many things about nihilism. What he wrote is often called the most important explanation of nihilism. Nietzsche wrote that nihilism comes from questioning traditional values until they fall apart. This is called \"\".\nThe Russian thinker Mikhail Bakunin inspired a lot of nihilists because he believed this kind of destruction was good. The word \"nihilism\" was then made popular by a Russian novel called \"Fathers and Sons\" by Ivan Turgenev. The hero of the story is a nihilist named Bazarov. Some other Russian thinkers such as Dmitry Pisarev also wrote good things about this kind of destruction. Russian nihilism inspired many revolutionaries, such as Sergei Nechaev and Vladimir Lenin. The Russian author Fyodor Dostoevsky was almost also a nihilist. But he became an after ten years in exile. He wrote about nihilism in many novels such as \"Crime and Punishment\". The people who assassinated the Russian emperor, Tsar Alexander II on 13 March 1881, are often thought of as nihilists.\nNietzsche thought value destruction could not be avoided, even though it has bad results. He also thought Christianity was a source of this value destruction, and was therefore a kind of nihilism. According to the French writer Gilles Deleuze, he thought Christianity was nihilistic because it was , meaning it has a negative and unhealthy attitude towards living. Religious thinkers have instead thought that nihilism comes from rejecting religion. Some parts of Buddhism have also been called a kind of nihilism, even though other parts strongly reject nihilism. In the 18th and 19th centuries, the word \"nihilism\" was mostly used against people who rejected religion or believed in nothing. Either way, nihilism is often seen as a word for life-denying beliefs.\nOrigins.\nThe word \"nihilism\" comes from \"\", which is the Latin word for \"nothing\". But the exact origins of the word \"nihilism\" are unclear. In the Middle Ages the word was used for some kinds of heresy. Around the time of the French Revolution, it was a word for the destruction of Christianity and traditional European values. It was used in many European countries. Soon, the word was also used in English. It probably came from the French, German, or Late Latin form of the word.\n\"Nihilism\" first became a philosophical word in German philosophy, and then in Russian philosophy. These two studies of nihilism were combined by Friedrich Nietzsche.\nGerman nihilism.\nIn 1733, the German writer Friedrich Lebrecht Goetz used the word \"nihilism\" as a literary term. Swiss esotericist Jacob Hermann Obereit also used the word in 1787, German thinker Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi did in 1799. This is where it first became part of philosophy. The belief that no one can know true reality is what Obereit called \"nihilism\". He used this definition to call the German thinker Immanuel Kant a nihilist. This was because Kant said people cannot be certain of real things, but can only be certain about their experience of real things. Jacobi also used this definition to say Kant and his followers were nihilists. For example, he famously called the German thinker Johann Gottlieb Fichte a nihilist. Jacobi thought both the humanism and German idealism that had come out of the Age of Enlightenment were kinds of nihilism. According to him, these so-called rational philosophies were the complete opposite of rational.\nAround 1824, the German journalist Joseph von G\u00f6rres used the word \"nihilism\" in a political way. He said that to reject social structures is nihilism. But the word \"nihilism\" almost died out during this time. For example, the German thinker Max Stirner is called one of the first true nihilists but he never used the word. He wrote most of his works in the 1840s.\nRussian nihilism.\nRussian nihilism was an early kind of nihilist philosophy. It was also a broad cultural movement that mixed with some revolutionary movements. Russian nihilism is often wrongly called a kind of political terrorism because of this. Its main interest was to destroy traditional values, especially in art and religion. Its main philosophers were Nikolay Chernyshevsky and Dmitry Pisarev. It also rejected the belief in free will and God. Unlike German nihilism which came from German idealism, Russian nihilism was strongly against idealism.\nThe Russian writer Nikolai Nadezhdin was probably the first to use the word \"nihilism\" in Russian publication. He first used it in 1829 by calling scepticism the same as nihilism. This same meaning was later used by the Russian writer Vasilij Bervi. The Russian journalists Mikhail Katkov and Vissarion Belinsky also used the word. Katkov said nihilism created a threat of revolution because it rejected all morality. Belinsky used the word in a more neutral way. But the word was still not popular at the time.\nThe Russian thinker Mikhail Bakunin is often called the father or Russian nihilism. In 1842, he wrote: \"Let us therefore trust the eternal Spirit which destroys and annihilates only because it is the unfathomable and eternal source of all life. The passion for destruction is a creative passion, too!\". Then in the 1850s and 60s, the theory behind Russian nihilism started to form. Originally it was a philosophy of scepticism towards morals and truth. It was in 1862 that the Russian author Ivan Turgenev made the word \"nihilism\" popular. He used it in his novel called \"Fathers and Sons\" to describe the attitude of the younger generation. The nihilists in the book say they are people who \"deny \", who do \"not take any principle on faith\", and who think that \"at the present time, negation is the most useful of all\". Even though Turgenev was more of an , many young people started to call themselves \"nihilists\" because of this book.\nFor Pisarev, nihilism was mostly philosophical and not political. He thought extraordinary people should free themselves from rules and morals. He thought anyone who did this would be above ordinary people. But later, Russian nihilism became more and more political. It inspired many revolutionaries such as Sergei Nechaev and Vladimir Lenin.\nNietzsche.\nFriedrich Nietzsche wrote many criticisms about nihilism that have become known as the most important explanation of nihilism. Even though Nietzsche was very critical of nihilism, he has similarities to earlier nihilists such as Dmitry Pisarev and Max Stirner. Because of this, he is sometimes called a nihilist and sometimes called an . His explanation of nihilism combined the German and Russian meanings of the word, and also went further.\nWhen Nietzsche asks the question \"What does nihilism mean?\", he gives the answer \"That the highest values themselves. The aim is lacking; 'Why?' finds no answer.\" According to Nietzsche, nihilism is when someone thinks the world should not exist, and the world does not exist. For example, some religions think the world is wrong , and should be perfect instead. He also says nihilism is \"not only the belief that everything deserves to perish\". Instead, it also makes an effort to ."}
{"id": "45189", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45189", "title": "Licensed to Ill", "text": "\"Licensed to Ill\" is the first album of the Beastie Boys, released on November 1986."}
{"id": "45191", "revid": "5136", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45191", "title": "Licensed To Ill", "text": ""}
{"id": "45195", "revid": "1131690", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45195", "title": "Coronary artery disease", "text": "Coronary artery disease, also called coronary heart disease, is a heart disease. (\"Coronary\" means \"the blood vessels of the heart\".) Coronary heart disease causes plaque to build up inside the coronary arteries. This causes the coronary arteries to become narrower. An artery is a blood vessel - a tube that carries blood. After the heart supplies blood that is full of oxygen and nutrients, the arteries carry the blood to different parts of the body. The coronary arteries are very important: they supply blood to the heart muscle. So when the coronary arteries become narrower, less blood gets to the heart muscle.\nMost people with coronary heart disease can feel healthy for years before they start experiencing symptoms. The most common symptom is a heart attack. If coronary heart disease is not treated, some of the plaques in the coronary arteries can break away and block the blood flow to the heart. Coronary heart disease is the most common cause of sudden death. It is also the most common cause of death in people over 65 years old. Men are 10 times more likely to get coronary heart disease than women.\nAtherosclerosis.\nAtherosclerosis is a form of heart disease. It causes fatty materials (like cholesterol) to build up in the arteries, forming harder materials called plaques. This causes the arteries to become narrower. It also makes it more difficult for blood to flow through the arteries. This can cause blood clots to form, blocking blood from traveling through the arteries. Small pieces of plaque can also break off and block smaller blood vessels.\nIf an artery becomes blocked completely, it causes serious problems. All cells, tissues, and organs in the body need oxygen and nutrients (carried by blood) to survive. If cells or tissues are not supplied with enough blood, they will die. (This is called necrosis.) When this happens in the coronary arteries, a section of the heart dies. This can cause a myocardial infarction (a heart attack) to happen.\nPrevention.\nPeople can do many different things to keep themselves from getting coronary heart disease:"}
{"id": "45199", "revid": "64031", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45199", "title": "Deoxys", "text": ""}
{"id": "45200", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45200", "title": "Fructose", "text": "Fructose is a simple sugar (monosaccharide) found in many foods. It is also one of the three most important blood sugars, the other two are glucose and galactose. Honey; tree fruits; berries; melons; and some root vegetables, such as beets, sweet potatoes, parsnips and onions, contain fructose, usually with sucrose and glucose. Processed foods also contain fructose due to how sweet it is."}
{"id": "45202", "revid": "1103903", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45202", "title": "Peer pressure", "text": "Peer pressure is being influenced by the peer group members. It often happens to children during puberty. The group defines some social values. For somebody to stay \"cool\" in that group, they feel as if they have to act like other people in that group. Social pressure (and wanting to be accepted or in favour inside the group) leads people to do things they would not do otherwise. For example, it can influence a person to smoke cigarettes or marijuana, to drink alcohol, commit crimes, and/or many other things that they might regret. Through adolescents are seen adults from external physical point of view, they lack proper mental maturity. Similarly, they look physically matured and do not intend to be in children's group but adults also do not value them as adults. Therefore, they create peer group of their own age to enjoy themselves. They have strong faith and belief on the friends of the same groups. Because of the changes they experience, the new desires, aspirations and interests are developed. They become sensitive and sentimental.\nWhen parents and society do not consider and address their needs, aspirations and desires, they feel dominated and leave home to pass most of their time with their friends on peer groups. Sometimes they cannot get proper counselling and guidelines in these stages. Consequently, sometimes, they can fall prey to many bad habits. There are many positives and negatives by peer pressure. \nPeer pressure is commonly thought of in a negative light, but in reality, it's not always a bad thing. Sometimes peer pressure is used to positively influence people. Learning about acceptable group norms can be a positive part of learning how to live with and socialize with other people. \nPositive peer pressure, in which people are influenced to do nice things like give to charity, is usually a good thing."}
{"id": "45203", "revid": "823563", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45203", "title": "Cuticle", "text": "In biology, a cuticle is something that covers the outside of living things called organisms. Cuticles are usually tough but also bendable. In plants, cuticles in the leaves help it from losing too much water by evaporation."}
{"id": "45208", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45208", "title": "Leek", "text": "Leek is a vegetable. It belongs to the genus \"Allium\". This is the same genus as the onion and garlic. It can be used for cooking.\nThey usually come in a cylinder like body and they are tall and skinny\nLeeks take around 100 to 120 days to grow and they are mainly harvested in Europe or Asia they are planted in deep holes to prevent them from sun and to avoid photosynthesis. The soil is required to be fertile and allows water to travel without crating puddles or drain to quickly.\nNutrition.\nLeeks contain only contain 61 calories, 14.15 Carbohydrates, 1.5g of protein, 0.3g Fat, Vitamins A, C, E and K."}
{"id": "45209", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45209", "title": "Great power", "text": "A great power is a nation or state that is able to influence other states in most of the world. That is possible because it has great economic, political and military strength. It is not as powerful as a superpower or hyperpower.\nIts opinions are taken into account by other nations before taking diplomatic or military action. Characteristically, they have the ability to intervene militarily almost anywhere. They also have soft, cultural power, and often economic investment in less developed countries. There is no definite list, but five great powers are permanent members of the United Nations Security Council and seven are in the G7.\nGreat powers.\nThe world's great powers as of the early 21st century are at least:"}
{"id": "45210", "revid": "5400", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45210", "title": "Major power", "text": ""}
{"id": "45213", "revid": "61467", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45213", "title": "Bite", "text": "A bite is a wound received from the teeth of an animal. Animals may bite things in self-defence. Animals also bite things to cut them into smaller pieces before they eat them.\nBites can cause many medical problems, such as:\nTreatment.\nBite wounds should be washed, ideally with povidone-iodine soap and water. The injury should then be loosely wrapped with a bandage. Open bite wounds are not sutured because of the risk of infection.\nAnimal bites caused by carnivores (other than rodents) may infect the victim with rabies if the animal that bit them carries it. If possible, the animal is caught and the head is looked at for signs of rabies. Signs of rabies include foaming at the mouth, self-mutilation, growling, jerky behaviour, and red eyes. If the animal lives for ten days and does not develop rabies, then the animal probably is not infected. In cases where the animal cannot be found, prophylactic rabies treatment is carried out in most places.\nSnake bites.\nMany of the world's snakes are not considered dangerous to humans, but even a bite from a \"safe\" snake may injure the victim if the wound is not treated properly, and large snakes such as constrictors are capable of causing a lot of damage with their bites.\nSpider bites.\nThe black widow spider and some scorpions are considered dangerous to humans, mostly to small children and elderly adults. Only the Sydney funnel-web spider of Australia is frequently dangerous to adults, and it lives only within 100 miles of Sydney. Antivenins are available in the United States for black widow spiders and the dangerous scorpions native to the region."}
{"id": "45217", "revid": "1143240", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45217", "title": "Northern Europe", "text": "Northern Europe is the northern part of the European continent. Most people see the following states as part of it:\nEurope, the planet's 6th largest continent, includes 47 countries and assorted dependencies, islands and territories. \nBefore the 19th century, the term 'Nordic' or 'Northern' was commonly used to mean Northern Europe in a sense that included the Nordic countries, European Russia, the Baltic countries (at that time Livonia and Courland) and Greenland.\nIn earlier eras, when Europe was dominated by the Mediterranean region (i.e. the Roman Empire), everything not near this sea was termed Northern Europe, including Germany, the Low Countries, and Austria. In medieval times, the term (Ultima) Thule was used to mean a semi-mythical place in the extreme northern reaches of the continent.\nIn a European Union context, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Germany, the UK, Ireland, Austria, Luxembourg, Belgium, Netherlands, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are often seen as belonging to a Northern group."}
{"id": "45219", "revid": "7854058", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45219", "title": "Western Europe", "text": "Western Europe is a geographic region of Europe. This term does not have a precise definition. Its use has changed over time. During the middle ages, the European parts of the Western World included those countries following Catholicism or Protestantism. During the Cold War, \"Western Europe\" was a geographic and socio-political concept. It meant the democratic European countries of the First World, which are also vaguely defined. It was and still is distinguished from Eastern Europe by differences of economics, politics, and religion. At its widest medieval definition, it includes the following 32 countries:\nMany of these countries were members of the Western European Union. Many, such as Norway, are also in Northern Europe or in Central Europe or Southern Europe.\nToday, the term \"Western Europe\" has to do with geography and with economics. The concept is commonly associated with liberal democracy, socialism and also with the European Union, though that also has some countries of Eastern Europe.\nMost of the countries in the region share Western culture, and many have economic, and political ties with countries in North and South America and Oceania.\nIn addition, Scandinavia (in Northern Europe) is commonly associated with social democracy and remains fairly neutral throughout international disputes. The Iberian Peninsula, the most western part of Europe is similarly closely linked to the Americas.\nIt is a monotonous area with long and irregular coastlines. "}
{"id": "45228", "revid": "414512", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45228", "title": "Furnace", "text": "A Furnace is a device used for heating. The word has different meanings, though:"}
{"id": "45230", "revid": "1041253", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45230", "title": "Southern Europe", "text": "Southern Europe is a region of the European continent. The officialise d\u00e9finition of southern europ is iberic peninsula, italian peninsula and balkanic peninsula. Spain, Portugal, Italy and Greece and over all the Mediterranean countries of the European continent as parts of Southern Europe.\nGeographical definition.\nGeographically, Southern Europe would be the south half of the landmass of Europe. This definition is relative, with no clear limits.\nThe Alps mountains are a physical barrier between Italy and the rest of Europe.\nGeopolitical definition of the United Nations.\nFor its official works and publications, the United Nations Organization has its own special definition of regions. Corsica for example is part of France, thus not part of Southern Europe, but Italian Tyrol belongs to Southern Europe as it is part of Italy..\nClimatical definition.\nThe climatic definition of southern Europe would be similar to the areas of Mediterranean climate. The Mediterranean climate is often thought to be a typical characteristic of Southern Europe. \nLinguistic and cultural definition.\nCountries of Latin Europe are often associated with the concept of Southern Europe, especially Italy and Spain. \nGreece, Malta and Anatolia are often associated with them.\nList of countries.\nAlthough there is no precise definition, the following territories are commonly thought to be parts of Southern Europe:"}
{"id": "45231", "revid": "1063131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45231", "title": "Corsica", "text": "Corsica is the fourth largest island in the Mediterranean Sea (after Sicily, Sardinia, and Cyprus). It is west of Italy, southeast of France, and north of the island of Sardinia.\nCorsica is one of the administrative regions of France.\nCorsica is famous for its tourist attractions, and as the birthplace of Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte.\nGeography.\nCorsica has 1,000\u00a0km of coastline and more than 200 beaches, and is very mountainous, with Monte Cinto as the highest peak at 2706m and 20 other peaks of more than 2000m.\nBig towns: (\"Corsican names\")\nOther towns and villages:\nThe land and weather.\nCorsica is the most mountainous Mediterranean island. The low ground has a Mediterranean climate. Summers are hot and dry. Winters are mild with moderate rainfall. The climate of the high ground is cold and is wetter. The natural vegetation is Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and shrubs. The mountains are rich of forests of oak, and pine, except for the high ground. Much of the coastal lowlands has been cleared for agriculture, which has reduced the mountain forests considerably. The island has a natural park (Parc Naturel R\u00e9gional de Corse), which protects thousands of rare animal and plant species. The park was created in 1972 and includes the Golfe de Porto, the R\u00e9serve Naturelle de Scandola (a UNESCO World Heritage Site), and some of the highest mountains on the island. This park is protected.\nAdministration.\nThe capital of the territorial collectivity of Corsica is Ajaccio (). The territorial collectivity is divided in two \"d\u00e9partements\": Corse-du-Sud and Haute-Corse. These two \"d\u00e9partements\" were created on September 15, 1975 by the \"d\u00e9partement\" of Corse.\nEconomy.\nTourism is the biggest source of Corsican economy. The island has a pleasant climate, beautiful mountains and really beautiful coastlines that make it a popular destination among the French and other Western Europeans. However, the island has not had the same level of intensive development as other parts of the Mediterranean. Tourism is particularly concentrated in the area around Porto Vecchio and Bonifacio in the south of the island and Calvi in the northwest.\nPolitics.\nCorsica is currently governed almost as any other \"r\u00e9gion\" of France. There are lots of movements on the island the independence of Corsica and of Corsicans from France. The French government is against full independence. There is support on the island for to have more autonomy, but polls show that a large majority of Corsicans are opposed to full independence. Some groups who claim to support Corsican independence have carried out a violent campaign since the 1970s that includes bombings and a few accidental assassinations, usually against \"pieds-noirs\" and other non-Corsicans, or buildings of the French government. Corsican independence groups attack when they are sure there won't be a danger for victims. However, not all groups for independence has \"nice treaties\", Sometimes independence groups are known to practice extortion and other intimidatory tactics, similar to mafia activity in Sicily and southern Italy. Non-Corsican homeowners may be threatened with the destruction of their home, or they are constrict to pay a \"revolutionarian tax\",for to help the groups in the attacks.\nIn 2000, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin agreed to give more autonomy to Corsica but just for stopping the violence. The propose of autonomy for Corsica would have included greater protection for the Corsican language (Corsu), the island's traditional language (which is also considered to be a dialect of Italian). However, the plans for increased autonomy were opposed by the Gaullist opposition in the French National Assembly. In a referendum on July 6,2003, a narrow majority of Corsican voters opposed to the project from the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin and Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy that would have suppressed the two \"d\u00e9partements\" of the island and granted more autonomy to the territorial collectivity of Corsica.\n\"U Corsu\", language of Corsica.\nIn Corsica the official language is French, but lots of people speak, \"u corsu\", the language of Corsica, protected by UNESCO. Corsu shares some similarities with Tuscan dialects (with their accents) or to Gallurese language, spoken in the nearby island of Sardinia. Corsu has two varietes, \"Supranacciu\", common in the northeast of theisland, (Bastia, Corte), and the \"Suttanacciu\" common in the south of the island, (Ajaccio, Sartene). The native Corsican language is closer to Italian than French, but both come from Latin. The ancient Romans spoke Latin.\nSport.\nIn Corsica, football is a very common sport. The island has in the first league of France ('Ligue 1'), 2 teams. The AC Ajaccio and the SC Bastia. Another very famous sport in Corsica, is volleyball, with the \"GFCO Ajaccio Volley-Ball' team."}
{"id": "45232", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45232", "title": "Maser", "text": "A maser is a device that produces light and heat by using atoms to release energy. It was invented by Charles Hard Townes in the 1950s. A maser takes the small vibrations in atoms and amplifies them to release electromagnetic radiation. Originally, they were referred to by the acronym MASER or 'Microwave Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. Unlike most radio transmitters, maser waves tend to have very similar wavelengths. Their usage was first predicted by Albert Einstein. In the 1960s masers were made to emit optical wavelengths, and soon were called lasers."}
{"id": "45234", "revid": "4822164", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45234", "title": "World Wide Web Consortium", "text": "The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is an organization created by Sir Tim Berners-Lee, in order to continue the development of the web, and its languages. Tim Berners-Lee also wants to make standards for the languages, and to improve them. As of 2 April 2010, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has 328 Members.\nAs of 29 March 2012, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has 351 members.\nAs of 9 June 2014, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has 384 Members."}
{"id": "45235", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45235", "title": "W3C", "text": ""}
{"id": "45240", "revid": "794806", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45240", "title": "List of pterosaurs", "text": "This is a list of pterosaurs."}
{"id": "45241", "revid": "6774740", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45241", "title": "Deinonychus", "text": "Deinonychus was a medium theropod dinosaur. It was a dromaeosaur, and also a larger relative of the famous \"Velociraptor\". This 3.4 meter (11\u00a0ft) long \"Deinonychus\" lived during the Lower Cretaceous, about 115-108 million years ago. Fossils have been found in the U.S. states of Montana, Wyoming, and Oklahoma.\n\"Deinonychus\" is perhaps the single most important dinosaur discovered in the mid 20th century.\nOstrom's analysis.\nPaleontologist John Ostrom's study of \"Deinonychus\" in the late 1960s started the debate on whether dinosaurs were warm-blooded. It is now accepted that all or most smaller theropods had feathers whose function was temperature regulation. Ostrom noted the small body, sleek, horizontal, posture, and the enlarged claws on the feet, which suggested the animal was an active, agile predator. Before this, the popular idea of dinosaurs had been one of plodding, reptilian giants.\n\"Deinonychus\" means 'Terrible claw'. This refers to the large, sickle-shaped claw bone on the second toe of each hind foot. In life, a horny sheath over this bone extended the length. Ostrom reconstructed the claw as over long.\nThe species name \"antirrhopus\" means \u201ccounter balance\u201d. This refers to Ostrom's idea that the tail balanced the front of the body. As in other dromaeosaurs, the tail vertebrae have ossified (bony) tendons and super-long bone processes. These features seemed to make the tail into a stiff counterbalance. A fossil of the closely related \"Velociraptor\" has an connected tail skeleton that is curved side to side in a long S\u2013shape. This suggests that, in life, the tail could swish to the sides with some flexibility.\nPaleoecology.\n\"Deinonychus\" remains have been found near those of the ornithopod \"Tenontosaurus\". Teeth discovered near \"Tenontosaurus\" specimens suggest it was hunted or at least scavenged by \"Deinonychus\"."}
{"id": "45247", "revid": "983938", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45247", "title": "Cheerleader", "text": "A cheerleader is a person who does cheerleading, or leads cheers for sporting events or during competition. This is usually done as a group. It is done to keep the spirit of a sports team up. \nHistory.\nThis sport is originally from the United States. It was first seen in the beginning of the 1900s. It was, and is still used to support a local sports group (for example football). \nBecause of the athletic ability often needed in cheerleading, many people think cheerleading is a sport. Cheerleaders perform routines that include dancing, tumbling, cheering, stunting and jumping. Cheerleading teams can compete in competitions against other cheer teams as well as perform for different sporting events."}
{"id": "45249", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45249", "title": "My Opera Community", "text": "The My Opera Community is a virtual community, which provides help and social networking services for people who use the Opera browser.\nHistory.\nThe My Opera Community started in August 2001 and will be shut down after February 2014. It currently has over 16,000,000 members, who are from all over the world."}
{"id": "45251", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45251", "title": "Permanent", "text": "Permanent used as an adjective usually means that something will stay for a long time or forever. Its opposite is temporary. Permanent may also mean other things."}
{"id": "45252", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45252", "title": "Linen", "text": "Linen is a material made from the fibers of the flax plant (\"Linum usitatissimum\"). It is mainly used to make cloth, especially for light clothing and table coverings.\nHistory.\nThe flax plant is one of the plants humans have grown and used. Linen cloth was already made at least 6,000 years ago in Egypt and Mesopotamia. This makes linen one of the oldest fibers and cloths used by humans, besides wool and hemp. Linen and hemp were the most important fiber plants in Europe for a long time. Linen was for example also used to wrap Egyptian mummies.\nIn recent centuries linen has largely been replaced by cotton and synthetic materials, which are cheaper."}
{"id": "45253", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45253", "title": "Celcius", "text": ""}
{"id": "45254", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45254", "title": "Hieroglyph", "text": "Hieroglyphs, or hieroglyphics, are a type of writing that uses symbols or pictures to stand for sounds and words. The Egyptians, Luwians and Mayan cultures are among those who used hieroglyphs. They have also been found in Turkey, Crete, United States and Canada.\nThey are thought to have started when pictures were used to tell stories on pots and other artwork. Over time, the pictures became letters.\nThe word \"hieroglyph\" comes from the Greek words \u1f31\u03b5\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2 (hier\u00f3s 'sacred') and \u03b3\u03bb\u03cd\u03c6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd (gl\u00faphein 'to carve' or 'to write'), and it was first used to mean Egyptian hieroglyphs. The Greeks who came to Egypt saw the picture letters, which were often found carved on house walls, tombs and monuments.\nAncient Egypt.\nAncient Egyptians used pictures to make a phonetic alphabet as in a rebus, so that each sound could be written with a picture-word, a \"phonogram\" or \"pictograph\". For example, a zig-zag for water n came to mean the letter \"n\", because the Egyptian word for water started with n. This same picture became our letter 'M' in the Latin alphabet, because the Semitic word for water started with m, and Semitic workers changed the symbols to fit sounds in their own language. In the same way, our Latin letter 'N' came from the hieroglyph for snake D as the word for \"snake\" started with n in Semitic. In Egyptian, this picture had stood for a sound like English \"J\" because of their word for snake. Some pictures came to represent ideas, and these are known as \"ideograms\".\nThe Egyptians used between 700 or 800 pictures, or glyphs. They were written from right to left and from top to bottom. They did not use punctuation.\nHistory.\nArchaeologists believe that the Egyptians began using hieroglyphs about 3300 or 3200 BCE. They were in use for more than 3500 years. Only the nobles, priests and government officials wrote in hieroglyphs. They were hard to learn and took a long time to write. People stopped using hieroglyphs when Christianity took hold in Egypt. Writing in hieroglyphs became more rare: the last known inscription was made in 394 CE.\nHieroglyphs, like Japanese or Chinese characters, started out as ideographic characters, or writing made of pictures. The ancient writing has no vowels, and all sounds in the writing are consonants.\nBreaking the code.\nAfter the end of the Egyptian civilization in 30 BCE, people no longer knew how to read the hieroglyphs. When the French took over Egypt in 1798, French soldiers found a large stone. This is now called the Rosetta Stone. The Rosetta Stone had writing in three different languages: hieroglyphs, Ancient Greek and demotic (a simplified form of hieroglyphs). Jean Fran\u00e7ois Champollion guessed that the writing on the stone was the same in three different languages. By using the Ancient Greek, he was able to work out the name of the ruler, Ptolemy V, in hieroglyphs. After many years of study, he was then able to work out how to read the other words.\nCretan hieroglyphs.\nA type of hieroglyphs was also used on Crete and the surrounding islands in the 2nd millennium BCE. This writing system developed into a script called Linear A. For some time, both writing systems were used. Of the 137 symbols are known, several resemble pictograms. 96 of the 137 known hieroglyphs occur in \"words\" and 32 seem to be logograms. \nThere are four numerals that represent 1, 10, 100 and 1000, respectively, and a symbol that looks like a small cross: it probably shows the beginning of the text. Because there are relatively few symbols, the writing is probably syllabic, much like Linear A. Most of the known texts are short: occur on sigils and clay shards."}
{"id": "45255", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45255", "title": "Papyrus", "text": "Papyrus is a kind of paper that was used in Ancient Egypt for writing. It was first made as far back as the 3rd millennium BC. It was made from a kind of reed called \"Cyperus papyrus\". This plant was originally grown in marshy areas around the Nile river. The plant had a variety of uses. The Egyptians also used the papyrus plants to make boats, mattresses, mats, rope, sandals, and baskets. Specially cultivated papyrus, grown on plantations, was used to make the writing material. They were first used in Ancient Egypt, but they were later used throughout the Mediterranean region."}
{"id": "45256", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45256", "title": "Sodium hypochlorite", "text": "Sodium hypochlorite is an unstable compound composed of sodium and hypochlorite ions. It is stable in solution, though. It is light green and has the chemical formula NaClO (or NaOCl). It is a strong oxidizing agent. It is used to disinfect (kill bacteria) and as a bleach to remove stains from clothing. It is not good for cotton because the sodium hydroxide normally contained eats away the clothing fibers. It reacts with acids to produce chlorine."}
{"id": "45257", "revid": "9907", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45257", "title": "Wrapping paper", "text": ""}
{"id": "45259", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45259", "title": "Raisin", "text": "Raisins are dried grapes. They have a lot of sugar."}
{"id": "45260", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45260", "title": "Taste bud", "text": "Taste buds are small 'bumps' on the tongue. They are the sense organs which detect the taste of things that go into the mouth. They are involved in detecting the five (known) elements of taste perception: salty, sour, bitter, sweet, and umami. "}
{"id": "45261", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45261", "title": "Calf", "text": "A calf can be:"}
{"id": "45262", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45262", "title": "Nectar", "text": "Nectar, in botany, is a liquid made by the flowers of plants. It is sweet because it has sugar in it. Plants make nectar to attract pollinating animals. It is made in glands called nectaries. The nectaries are usually at the bottom of the perianth of the flower. This means the animal trying to get the nectar has to touch the parts of the plant that are used for reproduction. By doing this, the animal getting the nectar helps the plants reproduce.\nSome plants make nectar outside the flower. These plants do it to attract predatory insects. These insects will eat both the nectar and any plant-eating insects found near the plant.\nNectar is economically important because it is where the sugar for honey comes from. It is also useful in agriculture and horticulture because the adults of many predatory insects, as well as hummingbirds, eat nectar. Some plants give off very rich scents, such as the Rocky Mountain Columbine"}
{"id": "45264", "revid": "380105", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45264", "title": "Hunting dog", "text": "A hunting dog is any dog who helps humans in hunting. There are several types of hunting dogs. The major categories of hunting dog include hounds, terriers, cur type dogs, and gun dogs. These categories have smaller groups in them that are based on different things the dogs are good at doing.\nTypes of hunting dogs.\nHounds.\nThere are two types of hounds, \"sight hounds\" and \"scent hounds\". The difference between them is if they use sight or smell to find what they are hunting for. They are often used to hunt animals with fur. In America, raccoon, coyote, and large predators are hunted with hounds, and traditionally in Britain hounds were used to hunt the fox.\nGun dog.\nThese dogs are also called bird dogs. They are used by hunters who carry shotguns to hunt small animals. Gun dogs come in three main classes. The classes are \"retriever\"s, \"flushing spaniels\", and \"pointing breeds\".\nRetrievers.\nThe main job of a retriever is to get the animal after the hunter shoots it. Retrievers are very good in the water and often used by hunters shooting ducks.\nFlushing spaniels.\nFlushing spaniels are used when birds being hunted are found in areas where they can hide, for example high grass. The spaniel will run through the grass. This makes the birds fly into the air so the hunter can shoot them. Spaniels stay close to the hunter so when the birds start to fly, the hunter is close enough to shoot them.\nPointers.\nPointers find birds then stand still and point at where the bird is. They often are farther away from the hunter than a spaniel would be. By pointing instead of flushing the bird out, they give the hunter time to get close enough to shoot the bird.\nTerriers.\nThese dogs are almost always used to hunt mammals. Terriers are used to find the den or living space of the animal. They will go into where the animal lives and either force it to run out or they will kill it. Many of the animals hunted with terriers are animals that cause damage, for example, ground hogs, fox and badger.\nCur types.\nCurs are used in the same way as terriers but on larger animals. Curs are used to hunt boars, raccoon, cougars, and other large mammals"}
{"id": "45265", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45265", "title": "Purebred dog", "text": "Purebred dogs are dogs whose ancestors are all the same breed.\nA breed of dog is a particular subspecies that has been bred through time to exhibit certain characteristics, for example a bulldog is bred to be short and have a flat nose while a greyhound is bred to be light and run fast. Some dogs are bred to look special which is why poodles have fluffy hair."}
{"id": "45266", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45266", "title": "MTR", "text": "The Mass Transit Railway or MTR (in Chinese, \u9999\u6e2f\u9435\u8def\u6709\u9650\u516c\u53f8, literally \"Hong Kong Railway Company\"; or \u6e2f\u9435 for short) is the main rapid transit railway system in Hong Kong. Since the MTR service first opened in 1979, the network has grown to more than 150 stations. Built and run by MTR Corporation Limited, the MTR system is a very popular mode of public transport in Hong Kong, with around 2.46 million passengers riding each day.\nConstruction.\nHong Kong's growing economy and the quick increase in population created a lot of traffic problems. The Hong Kong government made a study of these problems. The first line was opened in 1979. The MTR was quickly popular with the people of Hong Kong, so later they built more lines to cover more ground. People are still deciding how and where to expand the MTR network next.\nHistory of the MTR.\nInitial proposal.\nDuring the 1960s, the government of Hong Kong thought they need to accommodate increasing road traffic that growing Hong Kong's economy would bring. British transport consultants Freeman, Fox, Wilbur Smith &amp; Associates were appointed to study the transport system of Hong Kong. The consultants released the \"Hong Kong Mass Transport Study\" in September 1967, which proposed the construction of a mass transport underground railway system in Hong Kong.\nIn 1970, an underground network with four lines was laid out and planned as part of the British consultants' new report, \"Hong Kong Mass Transit: Further Studies\". The four lines were to be the Kwun Tong Line, Tsuen Wan Line, Island Line, and East Kowloon Line. However, the lines that were eventually constructed were somewhat different compared with the lines that were originally proposed by the \"Hong Kong Mass Transport Study\".\nIn 1972, the Hong Kong government authorised construction of the \"Initial System\", a 20-km system that roughly translates to the Kwun Tong Line today (except the line now extends to Tiu Keng Leng). Negotiations with four major construction consortia started in 1973. The government's intention was to tender the entire project, based on the British design, as a single tender at a fixed price. A consortium from Japan signed an agreement to construct the system in early 1974, but in December of the same year it pulled out from the agreement, stemming from fears of the Arab oil crisis.\nModified Initial System (Kwun Tong Line / Tsuen Wan Line).\nSeveral weeks later, in early 1975, a government agency known as the Mass Transport Provisional Authority was established to take charge of the project. It announced that the Initial System would be slightly reduced to 15.6 kilometres, and renamed it the Modified Initial System. Plans for a single contract were also abandoned in favour of 25 engineering contracts and 10 electrical and mechanical contracts.\nIn addition, the government-owned Hong Kong Mass Transit Railway Corporation (MTRC) was established to replace the Mass Transport Provisional Authority. (This was the company succeeded by the MTR Corporation Limited on 30 June 2000)\nConstruction of the Modified Initial System (now part of Kwun Tong Line and Tsuen Wan Line) commenced in November 1975. After almost four years, the northern section was completed on 30 September 1979. On 1 October 1979, the northern section was opened, with trains running from Shek Kip Mei to Kwun Tong. The route from Tsim Sha Tsui to Shek Kip Mei was opened in December of the same year.\nIn 1980, the first harbour crossing was made by an MTR train as the Kwun Tong Line was extended even farther to Chater station, now known as Central station. To deal with increasing patronage, trains were also extended to six cars.\nTsuen Wan Line.\nThe government approved construction of the Tsuen Wan Line in 1977, then known as Tsuen Wan Extension, and works commenced in November 1978. The project added a 10.5-kilometre section to the MTR system, from Prince Edward to Tsuen Wan. The line started service on 10 May 1982 with a total cost of construction (not adjusted for inflation) at HK$4.1 billion.\nWhen service of this line started, the section of the Kwun Tong Line from Chater to Argyle, present-day Mong Kok station, was transferred to the Tsuen Wan Line. Thus, Waterloo became the terminus of the Kwun Tong Line, and both Argyle and Prince Edward stations became interchange stations. This change was made because system planners expected traffic of the Tsuen Wan Line would exceed that of the Kwun Tong Line. This forecast proved quite accurate, necessitating a bypass from the northwestern New Territories to Hong Kong Island. Launched in 1998, the Tung Chung Line serves exactly that purpose.\nAlthough land acquisitions were made for a station at Tsuen Wan West, the station was never built. This is not to be confused with Tsuen Wan West Station on KCR West Rail, which lies on the newly reclaimed area near the former ferry pier.\nIt is interesting to note that since the line's opening in 1982, this is the only line whose alignment has virtually remained the same for the past 23 years. For example, the Kwun Tong Line's alignment has changed for 2 times since its opening - the taking over of Tsuen Wan Line from Mong Kok to Central, and the taking over of Eastern Harbour Crossing section by the Tseung Kwan O Line.\nIsland Line.\nGovernment approvals were granted for construction of the Island Line in December, 1980. Construction commenced in October, 1981. On 31 May 1985 the Island Line was opened with service between Admiralty and Chai Wan stations. Both Admiralty and Central stations became interchange stations with the Tsuen Wan Line. Furthermore, each train was extended to eight cars.\nOn 23 May 1986, service reached Sheung Wan station. Construction for this station was delayed for one year as government offices which sat on top of the station had to be removed to a new location before construction could start.\nEastern Harbour Crossing extension.\nIn 1984, the government approved the construction of the Eastern Harbour Crossing, a tunnel to be used by cars and MTR trains. The Kwun Tong Line was extended across the harbour to Quarry Bay, which became an interchange station for the Kwun Tong Line and the Island Line. The extension was launched on 5 August 1989. An intermediate station, Lam Tin, started operations on 1 October 1989.\nAirport Express and Tung Chung Line.\nThe decision was made in October 1989 to construct a new international airport at Chek Lap Kok on Lantau Island to replace the overcrowded Kai Tak International Airport. The government invited the MTR to build a train line, then known as the Lantau Airport Railway, to the airport. But construction did not begin until the Chinese and British governments settled their financial and land disagreements in November 1994.\nIn the end, the new line was included in the financing plans of the new Hong Kong International Airport as the airport was not considered viable without direct public transport links. Construction costs were also shared by the MTR which was granted many large-scale developments in the construction plans for the new stations.\nThe Lantau Airport Railway turned into two MTR lines, the Tung Chung Line and the Airport Express. The Tung Chung Line was officially opened on 21 June 1998 by Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chee Hwa, and service commenced the next day. The Airport Express opened for service on 6 July 1998 along with the new Hong Kong International Airport.\nThe Airport Express line is the second most popular means of transport to the Hong Kong International Airport. In 2005, 22% of the commuters took the Airport Express to and from the airport.\nTseung Kwan O Line.\nThe Quarry Bay Congestion Relief Works involved extending the Hong Kong Island end of the Kwun Tong Line from Quarry Bay to North Point via a 4.2\u2013kilometre tunnel. The project was initiated due to overcrowding at Quarry Bay and persistent passenger complaints about the five-minute walk from the Island Line platforms to the Kwun Tong Line platform. Construction began in September 1997 and was completed in September 2001 at a cost of HK$3.0 billion (US $385\u00a0million). The tried-and-true cross-platform interchange arrangement is repeated here.\nConstruction of the Tseung Kwan O Line was approved on 18 August 1998 to serve new housing developments. Construction began on 24 April 1999 and the line officially opened in 2002, taking over the train tracks running through the Eastern Harbour Tunnel from the Kwun Tong Line, running from Po Lam to North Point. When the line was opened, the Kwun Tong Line was diverted to Tiu Keng Leng on the new line. Construction costs were partly covered by the Hong Kong Government and private developers which linked construction of the Tseung Kwan O Line to new real estate and commercial developments. Previously less developed areas were opened up for development with more transport options.\nWest Rail Line.\nWhile the construction of the Tung Chung Line was still underway, the plan to build a railway corridor serving the northwestern New Territories was conceived. Space had been reserved for the addition of an interchange station and two extra tracks (to allow nonstop service for the Airport Express) between Olympic and Lai King. Originally known as the Airport Railway Phase 2, the contracts of the West Rail Line Interface Works were awarded shortly after construction works of the West Rail commenced. The project comprised Mei Foo Interchange (modification of the existing Mei Foo station on the Tsuen Wan Line to provide a pedestrian link to the West Rail Line Mei Foo Station); Nam Cheong Station (an interchange station on the Tung Chung Line, jointly operated by the MTRCL and KCRC) and quadruplication works (the additional two tracks, four kilometres in length, allow the Tung Chung Line trains to stop at Nam Cheong without blocking the passage of Airport Express trains).\nThe works were completed in stages. The Tung Chung Line trains have been diverted to the new track since mid May 2003, whereas the Mei Foo station interchange subway and the Nam Cheong station were opened at the same time the West Rail Line opened for public use in December 2003. The Kowloon Southern Link extension from Nam Cheong Station to East Tsim Sha Tsui Station was opened on 16 August 2009, with West Rail Line trains now terminating at Hung Hom Station, interchange station for East Rail Line.\nInterchange stations.\nThe interchange between the Tsuen Wan Line and the Kwun Tong Line, the Island Line and the Tseung Kwan O Line, as well as that between the Kwun Tong Line and the Tseung Kwan O Line, are two stations long, allowing cross-platform interchange wherein a passenger leaves a train on one side of the platform and boards trains on the other side of the platform for another line. For example, when passengers are travelling on the Kwun Tong Line towards Tiu Keng Leng, getting off at Yau Tong would allow them to switch trains across the platform for the Tseung Kwan O Line towards North Point. Whereas, staying on the train and reaching Tiu Keng Leng would allow them to board the Tseung Kwan O Line trains towards Po Lam/LOHAS Park. This design makes interchanging more convenient and passengers do not have the need to change to different levels. However this interchange arrangement is not available for all transferring passengers at Kowloon Tong, Central, Hong Kong, Nam Cheong (Except transfer between Tuen Mun and Hong Kong bound trains), Mei Foo, Tai Wai Station (Except alighting from Ma On Shan Line to change southbound trains for East Rail Line) and Sunny Bay (Except alighting from Tung Chung bound trains to Disneyland Resort Line) stations, mainly because this service is available only when there are two continuous stations shared as interchange stations by two lines.\nTwo major works were undertaken to facilitate interchange between Kwun Tong Line and East Rail Line. The modification of Kowloon Tong Station started in June 2001. A new pedestrian link to Kowloon Tong Station southern concourse and a new entrance (Exit D) were opened on 15 April 2004 to cope with the increase in interchange passenger flow. Modification to Tsim Sha Tsui Station involved upgrading station facilities and concourse layout to facilitate access from the East Tsim Sha Tsui Station via its pedestrian links. New entrances to the subway links were opened on 19 September 2004 (Exit G) and 30 March 2005 (Exit F), with the whole scheme completed in May 2005.\nMa On Shan Line.\nThe Ma On Shan Line was constructed by the KCR to serve Ma On Shan and City One residential areas and operation of the line was outsourced to the MTR. The system mostly runs on a viaduct between the middle of roads with stations, stopping right next to major buildings. The only time the trains don't run on viaducts is when the railway meets the route 2 highway, where it runs in the middle and then raises back to a viaduct. The railway is slightly different from all other Hong Kong railways because the trains run on the right, not the left; this is so that passengers can easily interchange from the Ma On Shan line to the East Rail Line towards Hong Hum. The majority of passengers using the line get off the train at Tai Wai to interchange to the East Rail Line, using the line as a feeder route.\nDisneyland extension.\nThe Disneyland Resort Line, previously known as Penny's Bay Rail Link, provides service to the Hong Kong Disneyland Resort which was opened on 12 September 2005. Service to Sunny Bay station on the Tung Chung Line started in 2005. The new line and the Disneyland Resort station opened on 1 August 2005. It is a 3.5\u2013kilometre single-track railway that runs between Sunny Bay station and Disneyland Resort station. The Disneyland Resort station itself was designed to blend in with the ambience of the resort. The line currently operates fully automated, trains running every four to ten minutes without a driver, and the carriages were changed from the existing M-Train rolling stock to match the recreational and adventurous nature of the 3.5-minute journey.\nFurther expansion of the Airport Express.\nThe new AsiaWorld-Expo Station is an extension of the Airport Express serving the new international exhibition centre, known as the AsiaWorld-Expo at Hong Kong International Airport. The station opened on 20 December 2005 along with the exhibition centre. To cope with the projected increase in patronage, Airport Express trains have been expanded to utilise eight carriages from the previous seven. Additional trains will also be deployed on the Tung Chung line during major exhibitions and events.\nPrivatisation and merger.\nOn 5 October 2000, the operator of the MTR network, MTR Corporation Limited (MTRCL), became Hong Kong's first rail company to be privatised, marking the beginning of the Hong Kong government's initiative to dissolve its interests in public utilities. Prior to its listing on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, the Mass Transit Railway Corporation (MTRC) was wholly owned by the Hong Kong government. The offering involved the sale of about one billion shares, and the company now has the largest shareholder base of any company listed in Hong Kong. In June 2001, MTRCL was transferred to the Hang Seng Index.\nMTRCL has often developed properties next to stations to complement its already profitable railway business. Many recently built stations were incorporated into large housing estates or shopping complexes. For example, Tsing Yi station is built next to the Maritime Square shopping centre and directly underneath the Tierra Verde housing estate.\nOn 11 April 2006, MTRCL signed a non-binding memorandum of understanding with the Hong Kong government, the owner of Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation, to merge the operation of the two railway networks in Hong Kong in spite of the strong opposition by the KCRC staff. The minority shareholders of the corporation approved the proposal at an extraordinary general meeting on 9 October 2007, allowing MTRCL to take over the operation of the KCR network and combine the fare system of the two networks on 2 December 2007.\nOn 2 December 2007 the Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation (KCRC) granted a 50-year service concession (which may be extended) of the KCR network to MTRCL, in return for making annual payments to KCRC, thereby merging the railway operations of the two corporations under MTRCL's management. At the same time MTRCL changed its Chinese name from \"\u5730\u9435\u6709\u9650\u516c\u53f8\" (Subway Limited Company) to \"\u9999\u6e2f\u9435\u8def\u6709\u9650\u516c\u53f8\" (Hong Kong Railway Limited Company), but left its English name unchanged. After the merger, the MTR network included three more lines, East Rail Line, West Rail Line and Ma On Shan Line, as well as the Light Rail network and Guangdong Through Train to Guangzhou.\nOn 28 September 2008, fare zones of all commuter lines which is ex-KCR were merged. A passenger could travel on these networks with only one ticket, except where a transfer is made between Tsim Sha Tsui and East Tsim Sha Tsui stations, where two tickets are required. Student discounts on Octopus Card were also issued.\nSafety on the MTR.\nVarious campaigns and activities are taken to help ensure that the MTR is a safe system to travel on. Poster campaigns displaying information on topics such as escalator safety are a common sight in all MTR stations, and announcements are made regularly as safety reminders to travelling passengers.\nBylaws have been recently introduced to deter potentially dangerous actions on the MTR, such as the ban of flammable goods on the MTR and rushing into trains when the doors are closing. Penalties ranging from fines to imprisonment have been imposed for such offenses. Metallic balloons are also banned due to previous incidents on KCR and on MTR's Island Line where a metallic balloon interfered with the operation of the overhead power lines.\nPolice officers patrol on trains and stations, and police posts are available at some stations. The Hong Kong Police Force has a Railway District responsible for the MTR and the KCR. Closed-circuit television cameras are installed in stations.\nTung Chung Line, the Airport Express and Tseung Kwan O Line, except Quarry Bay station, had platform screen doors (PSDs) installed upon construction. These doors prevent people from falling onto the rails, and MTRC allowed the assumption that this implementation was primarily a safety campaign, without heavily promoting it directly. In fact, the primary motivation was to separate the stations from the tunnels, hence allowing substantial energy savings on station air-conditioning and tunnel ventilation. Automatic platform gates (APGs) have also been installed at the Sunny Bay and Disneyland Resort stations. Their heights are half of the PSDs and only prevent people from falling onto the rails.\nIn June 2000, The MTR Corporation proceeded with its plans to retrofit 2,960 pairs of platform screen doors at all 30 underground stations on the Kwun Tong Line, Tsuen Wan Line, and Island Line in a six-year programme. The programme made MTR the world's first railway to undertake the retrofitting of PSDs on a passenger-carrying system already in operation. A prototype design was first introduced at Choi Hung station in the 3rd quarter of 2001. HK$0.10 per passenger trip was levied on Octopus card users to help fund the HK$2 billion retrofit programme. The whole installation scheme was completed in October 2005. The original completion year was 2006. The MTR Corporation said that part of the cost had to be assumed by passengers.\nStation facilities, amenities and services.\nWith the high level of daily passenger traffic, facilities of MTR stations are built with durability and accessibility in mind. The elevators and escalators in stations are heavy duty, with the elevators installed by Otis Elevator Company/Fujitec and the escalators installed by Constructions Industrielles de la Mediterran\u00e9e and Otis Elevator Company.\nAfter extensive retrofits, the MTR system has become, in general, disabled-friendly\u2014the trains have dedicated wheelchair space, the stations have special floor tiles to guide the blind safely on the platforms, and there are extra wide entry and exit gates for wheelchairs as well.\nUnlike many other metro systems around the world, \"main line\" MTR stations do not have toilet facilities, although their installation has been contemplated. Only stations on the Airport Express and Disneyland Resort Line have access to toilet facilities.\nInterchange stations.\nThe MTR network is unique in its arrangement of interchange stations. Interchange stations between the Island, Tsuen Wan, Kwun Tong and Tseung Kwan O lines are arranged in pairs; such an arrangement allows cross-platform interchange wherein a passenger leaves a train on one side of the platform and boards trains on the other side of the platform for another line.\nMost of those stations make use of a cross-platform interchange system, where the commuter can change to another line on the opposite platform. For example, when a person is travelling on the Kwun Tong Line towards Tiu Keng Leng, getting off at Yau Tong would allow him to change trains across the platform for the Tseung Kwan O Line towards North Point. Whereas, staying on the train and reaching Tiu Keng Leng would allow you to change trains for the Tseung Kwan O Line towards Po Lam.\nThis not only makes it more convenient for passengers, it also reduces the amount of traffic per station. Riders are made aware of the closest connection point by way of in-train visual and auditory messages. Although riders can disregard these tips, the design of the stations are for the convenience of passengers.\nTelecommunications network coverage.\nA full GSM (GSM-900 and GSM-1800), CDMA and TDMA mobile phone network is in place throughout the MTR system of stations and tunnels. Passengers can stay connected underground.\nCurrently, full 3G network coverage in all stations and tunnels (except West Rail Line) for the MTR system has been provided by 3 Hong Kong, SmarTone-Vodafone and PCCW Mobile. Passengers with subscription services will be able to make video calls and access high speed video content on their mobile phones regardless whether the train is above ground or under ground.\nShops and other services.\nUntil recently, MTR stations only had branches of the Hang Seng Bank and Maxim's Cakes stores, owned by Jardine Matheson, and a handful of other shops. Since the privatisation of the MTR, however, numerous shops have been added to certain stations, turning them into miniature shopping centres. Services available at most stations include:\nApart from retailers, there are also dentists and medical clinics, drycleaners, and florists along the Tseung Kwan O Line. Standard services include payphones, vending machines (Coca-Cola only), and self-service photo-booths.\nFree magazines and newspapers.\n\"Recruit\" was the first free magazine which was solely distributed in MTR stations since July 1992. However, in July 2002, the contract between the magazine and MTR was terminated. Another recruitment magazine \"Jiu Jik\" (\u62db\u8077), published by \"South China Morning Post\", replaced \"Recruit\" as the only free recruitment magazine distributed in MTR stations on every Tuesdays and Fridays.\nAt the same time, there was another entertainment magazine \"Hui Kai Guide\" (\u53bb\u8857 Guide). However, it is no longer distributed in MTR stations since 2006.\nThe \"Metropolis Daily\" (\u90fd\u5e02\u65e5\u5831), published by Metro International, is the first free newspaper distributed free in MTR stations from Monday to Friday (except public holidays); and in 2005, there is another weekend newspaper \"Express Post\" (\u5feb\u7dda\u5468\u5831), distributed every Saturday except public holidays.\nThe \"Metropop\" (\u90fd\u5e02\u6d41\u884c), also published by Metro International, started its distribution in MTR stations every Thursdays since April 27 2006, few months after the termination of \"Hui Kai Guide\". It is a weekly magazine featuring cultural affairs and city trends.\nExtra services for Airport Express.\nThe Airport Express also offer value-added services to travellers on the line. Toilets and check-in facilities are available at every station on the line. A free Airport Express shuttle bus service transports travellers from stations to their respective hotels as well. Flight passengers can even have in-town check-in at the station, which offers a more convenient and time-saving routine.\nFares and tickets.\nAs of January 2005, there are two different fare classes on the MTR: Adult and concessionary. Only children below the age of 12, senior citizens 65 years or older, or full-time Hong Kong students between the ages of 12 and 25 qualify for the concessionary rate. Children below the age of 3 travel free.\nSimilar to some other metro systems in the world, the fare payable by a passenger depends on the approximate distance travelled. However, taking any particular station as the origin, the other stations fall into fare \"zones\" depending on the distance from the origin. The fare to all stations in a \"zone\" is the same and increases with distance, especially if the journey involves a harbour crossing. Adult fares range from HK$3.80 to $26.00. Concessionary fares are usually half the adult fare, and range from HK$2.40 to $13.00. Fares for the Airport Express Line are significantly higher.\nThe price of using MTR is very low. For example, the price of going from Tsing Yi to Causeway Bay by taxi is around HK$200. Travelling the same distance by MTR costs HK$11.80 for grown up people and HK$5.40 for young and very old people. People can buy a one way ticket or a Octopus card to enter MTR. Octopus card is a contact-less smart card.\nOctopus cards.\nThe Octopus card is a rechargeable contactless smart card used in an electronic payment system in Hong Kong. It was launched in September 1997 for use on both the MTR and the KCR and now is the most widely used electronic cash system for transactions in Hong Kong as many retailers are fitted with readers.\nThe Octopus card uses radio frequency identification (RFID) technology so that users need only hold the card in front of the reader. Physical contact is not required, and the card need not even be taken out because the reader can penetrate through material. This fare collection system has been so popular that many cities such as Singapore, London, Chicago, and Taipei have adopted the idea, launching their own version of smart cards, respectively named EZ-link, Oyster card, and EasyCard.\nExcept for the Airport Express, MTR fares are slightly lower when using an Octopus card compared to using single journey tickets. For example, the cost of the 3-minute journey from Admiralty to Tsim Sha Tsui across the Victoria Harbour is (as of 2005) HK$7.9 using the Octopus card, compared with HK$9.0 for a single-journey ticket.\nTourist pass.\nTwo types of tourist passes are available: one allows unlimited rides for a single day (at HK$50), while the other allows three days of unlimited rides on the MTR, with a stored value of HK$20, refundable deposit of HK$50 and choice of either a single (HK$220) or return (HK$300) trip on the Airport Express.\nTourists are required to produce proof of tourist status, (e.g. passports or, in the case of Mainland travellers, entry permits) when purchasing the pass, and whenever requested by a ticket inspector during spot-checks.\nOther fares.\nThe magnetic fare card system is used for single journey tickets. These tickets are pre-paid for between pre-determined stations, and are good for only one trip. There are no return tickets, except on the Airport Express.\nFares for the Airport Express are substantially different from main line fares. Apart from single tickets, same-day return tickets (same price as a single), and one-month return tickets are also available.\nA one-day pass can be used to unlimited travel to/from Hong Kong Disneyland within the same day, and costs HK$50. This pass can be purchased from any MTR Customer Service Centres or Airport Express Customer Service Centres.\nMTR rolling stock.\nFour variations of rolling stock operate on the MTR on 1.5kV DC overhead electrification. All trains are electric multiple units (EMUs), with ATC and ATP, operating on 1432\u00a0mm rail gauge. Except for the rolling stock of the Airport Express, all trains are designed with features to cope with high density passenger traffic on stopping services. Examples are the latitudinal seating arrangement, additional ventilation fans and 5 doors on each side per car.\nThe Tung Chung Line and the Airport Express use dedicated rolling stock designs specified to their respective lines. Initially run in 7-car formations, they have now been lengthened to eight cars. These two variations are built jointly by Adtranz (now Bombardier Transportations) and Construcciones y Auxiliar de Ferrocarriles between 1994\u201397.\nThe other lines are operated using a mixture of the other two variations, known as the \"M-Train\" and the \"K-Stock\". The \"M-Stock\" (or CM-Stock\") of \"M-Train\" are the oldest trains on the MTR, built originally by Metro Cammell (now Alstom) and refurbished by United Goninan. The \"M-Train\" is the only variation that uses sliding doors, as opposed to others which use plug-doors. The \"K-Stock\" are built jointly by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and ROTEM, and a further order of 32 cars is due to be in service on the Tung Chung Line by 2007.\nThe Disneyland Resort Line uses driverless \"M-Trains\" with their appearance overhauled to suit the atmosphere and theme of the line. Windows on each carriage and the handrails inside are made into the shape of Mickey Mouse's head, and there are bronze-made Disney characters decorating the interior of the carriages.\nVaries\nArt promotion.\nWith the objective \"not only bring MTR passengers more time for life, but also more time for art\", the \"Art in MTR\" Initiative has been a success since its reception in 1998, where the Airport Express Artwork Programme was the pioneer project. Thereafter, live performances, art exhibitions, display of artwork by established and emerging artists, students and young children have been brought into the MTR stations. MTR Corporation Limited have even made art part of the station architecture when building new stations or renovating existing ones. Artworks are exhibited in different forms on the network, including \"arttube\", open art gallery, community art galleries, roving art, living art, and art in station architecture.\nBy incorporating elements of art into the railway network, the travelling environment for the passengers is not only enhanced, but also makes their journeys even more pleasant and enjoyable. Moreover, with MTR stations being an integral part of the neighbourhood, the programme also provides opportunities to promote Hong Kong's community art, encourage art appreciation among the public and give residents a feeling of home at the stations.\nThe future.\nMTR Corporation Limited has suggested several future projects to the Hong Kong Government, with some already being built. The network is also set to grow quite much when MTR Corporation Limited joins with the government-owned Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation (KCRC), with the non-binding \"Memorandum of Understanding\" agreement signed on 11 April 2006 to give MTR Corporation control of the KCR network for 50 years. The new Sha Tin to Central Link that was first given to KCRC would now also be run by MTR Corporation Limited, which will run from Tai Wai Station in Tai Wai to Central.\nIt has also been suggested to improve parts of MTR that are running now. Airport Station on the Airport Express will have a new platform to serve passengers flying out of Hong Kong International Airport's Skyplaza. New subway links to the stations are also being made, and it has been proposed to lengthen the Tseung Kwan O Line with a branch line to Tseung Kwan O South, and the Kwun Tong Line as far as Whampoa Garden, also linking with the Sha Tin to Central Link expansion.\nThe West Island Line and South Island Line, first suggested to the government by MTR on 21 January 2003, was finally accepted on 30 June 2005. It was made up of the West Island Line that took the Island Line to Kennedy Town, and the South Island Line (East section) from Admiralty to Ap Lei Chau and South Island Line (West section) that connects the other two lines. This is being talked about now and the whole longer line should be finished and running by 2012."}
{"id": "45267", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45267", "title": "Rib cage", "text": "The ribcage is a part of the skeleton of humans and some animals. It is made up of curved bones called ribs. The rib cage is found in the chest area. It protects a person's internal organs from damage. Most humans have 12 pairs of rib bones with one from each pair on each side of the chest. Some people may have 11 or 13 pairs of rib bones. The bones are also filled with bone marrow. The bones that are connected to the sternum directly are called true ribs, and the bones that are connected to the sternum indirectly, through the seventh bone, are called false ribs (eighth, ninth, and tenth bones), and the bones which are not connected to the sternum, and is connected to the back bone, are called floating ribs. If these floating ribs were connected to the sternum, we could not breathe properly, as the chest needs space to expand and decrease. The rib cage is also called the thoracic cavity."}
{"id": "45268", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45268", "title": "Life form", "text": ""}
{"id": "45270", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45270", "title": "Suborder", "text": ""}
{"id": "45271", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45271", "title": "Founder", "text": "Founder could mean:\nFounders could mean:"}
{"id": "45274", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45274", "title": "Interview", "text": "An interview is a conversation where somebody is trying to get information from another person. The person asking questions is the interviewer and the person answering questions is the interviewee. \nEmployers interview people trying to get a job to find out if they are a good person for the job. Researchers use an interview to ask people to find how they feel or what they know about something. Since the middle 19th century, interviews have often been used in journalism to get information for stories on news shows or in newspapers. \nPolice interview witnesses to a crime to find out what happened. Military intelligence agents interview prisoners to learn about enemy plans and capabilities. These interviews are often called interrogation."}
{"id": "45280", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45280", "title": "Athelstan", "text": "Athelstan or \u00c6thelstan, (893/4\u201327 October 939), called the Glorious, was the first King of England. He reigned from 924 to 939. He was the son of King Edward the Elder. Athelstan's reign is sometimes overlooked but it was of great importance to political developments in the 10th century.\nAthelstan was the son of Edward the Elder, and grandson of Alfred the Great. His father succeeded, after some difficulty, to the Kingdom of the Anglo-Saxons formed by Alfred. His father had also been the King of Mercia. When Edward died Athelstan quickly became King of Mercia but he was not immediately accepted as King of England. His brother, \u00c6lfweard, had more support in England but died soon after Edward. This made it easier for Athelstan to become king.\nFor Athelstan it was very important to have many allies. A year after his crowning he married one of his sisters to the Viking King of Northumbria, Sithric. However, Sithric died only a year later, and Athelstan seized Northumbria. This move made him king of more land than any other before him, roughly the same as modern England. Historical records indicate that the other rulers in Great Britain accepted him as king at Bamburgh around this time.\nAthelstan died at Gloucester in 939 and was succeeded by his half-brother, Edmund I."}
{"id": "45281", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45281", "title": "Firefly (TV series)", "text": "Firefly is an American science fiction television series. It first aired in the United States and Canada on September 20, 2002. It is set in the future, but also has many things about it which would be expected in a story of the American Old West. This combination of past and future gives a unique science fiction setting for the story. It was created by writer and director Joss Whedon, creator of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" and \"Angel\". He created it with his production company, Mutant Enemy. Whedon was the executive producer, along with Tim Minear.\n\"Firefly\" was first broadcast on the FOX network. It was cancelled after only eleven of the fourteen episodes were shown. Even though the show did not last long, it sold very well when it was released onto DVD and had great fan support. Because of this, Whedon and Universal Pictures made a movie based on the series, titled \"Serenity\". The movie was named after the fictional spaceship in the show. It won an Emmy in 2003 for \"Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series\".\nThe series is set in 2517 AD. It follows the adventures of the crew of \"Serenity\", a \"Firefly\"-class spaceship. The cast play the nine characters who live on \"Serenity\". Whedon described the show as \"nine people looking into the blackness of space and seeing nine different things\". The show looks at the changing lives of people who fought on the losing side of a civil war. It also shows the pioneer culture that is on the edges of their star system. It is a future where the only two superpowers, the United States and China, joined to create a single government. This government was called the \"Alliance\". This also caused the two cultures to blend into each other. Whedon said that nothing has changed in the future. There are more people with better technology, but they still have the same problems politically, morally and ethically.\nProduction.\nCreation.\nWhedon came up with the idea for the show after reading \"The Killer Angels\", a novel about the Battle of Gettysburg during the American Civil War. He wanted to follow people who had fought on the losing side of a war. He wanted to look at their lives after the war on the edges of civilization. It was meant to be the kind of drama with a lot of people trying to figure out their lives in a pioneer environment. Whedon wanted to have a show that was about when life was physical and things did not come easy to people. Whedon was also very interested in science fiction and wanted to make something for television that was character-driven and dirty.\nFor the name of the show, Joss Whedon wanted something that had strength and movement. He felt that the word \"firefly\" had both. The fact that it was also something small with a powerful name made him like it more. From there, he created the ship in the image of a firefly.\nFormat.\nWhile making the first episode, Whedon was arguing with FOX that the show should be shown in widescreen format. Because of this, he filmed scenes with actors on the edge of both sides so that they would have to show it that way. However, the pilot was turned down by the FOX executives. They thought that it did not have enough action. They also did not like the captain. FOX told Whedon on a Friday afternoon that he had to make a new script by Monday morning or they would not do it. Whedon and Tim Minear spent the weekend writing a new episode, \"The Train Job\". In this new episode, the captain was more \"happy\" and they added \"larger than life\" characters. These characters were the henchman \"Crow\", and the \"hands of blue\" men, that also introduced a \"X-Files\"-type ending.\nSet design.\nProduction designer Carey Meyer built the ship \"Serenity\" in two parts. It was built as a complete set. It had ceilings and working lights built in as part of the set that the cameras could use. It also had movable parts. This helped with moving the camera around inside the set. There were other good things about this set design. One was that it let the people watching feel that they were really in a ship. For Whedon, the design of the ship was very important. It defined the known space for the viewer. He wanted to show that it was simple and that it was \"beat-up but lived-in and ultimately, it was home\". Each room had a feel to it, usually shown by the paint color.\nTheir small budget was a reason to use the ship for much of telling the story. When the characters did go off of the ship, the worlds all had Earth atmosphere and colors. They could not afford to build alien worlds.\nMusic.\nThe theme song, \"The Ballad of Serenity\", was written by Joss Whedon and performed by Sonny Rhodes. Whedon wrote the song before the series was approved by Fox. An early recording done by Whedon can be found on the DVD release.\nThe soundtrack to the series was released on CD on November 8, 2005 by Var\u00e8se Sarabande. The musical score matches the blending of cultures in the show. Cowboy guitar blended with an Asian feel was the musical background for the series. Greg Edmonson wrote the music for the series. He said that he wrote for the emotion of the moment.\nCasting.\nIn casting his nine-member crew, Whedon looked first at the actor and how they got along with others. All nine cast members were chosen before filming began. However, while filming the original pilot \"Serenity\", Whedon saw that the actress cast as Inara Serra (Rebecca Gayheart) was not right for the role.Morena Baccarin auditioned for the role and two days later was on the set in her first television show.\nWhedon asked Nathan Fillion to play the lead role of Malcolm Reynolds. After telling him the idea for the show and showing him the pilot, Fillion wanted the role. Fillion was called back several times to read for the part before he was cast.\nAlan Tudyk auditioned and was told to come back in to test with the possible Zoes (the character's wife). It was down to him and one other person. The Zoes did not work out and Tudyk was sent home. He got a call telling him he had the part anyway.\nVeteran science fiction-fantasy actress Gina Torres (\"The Matrix Reloaded\", \"\") did not at first want to do another science fiction show, but \"was won over by the quality of the source material.\" As she recalled, \"So you had these challenged characters inhabiting a challenging world and that makes for great storytelling. AND NO ALIENS!\"\nAdam Baldwin grew up watching westerns. The character of Jayne Cobb was a role that was perfect for him.\nCanadian actress Jewel Staite has been an actress since age nine. She videotaped her audition from Vancouver. she was asked to come to Los Angeles to meet Whedon, where she was cast for the role of Kaylee Frye, the ship's engineer.\nSean Maher remembers reading for the part and liking the character of Simon Tam. He said it was Whedon's personality and vision that \"sealed the deal\" for him. For the role of Simon's sister, Whedon called in Summer Glau for an audition and test the same day. Glau had first worked for Whedon on an episode of \"Angel\". Two weeks later Whedon called her to tell her she had the part. This was Glau's first speaking role.\nThe veteran television actor Ron Glass (\"Barney Miller\", \"All in the Family\"), has said that until \"Firefly\", he had not thought about a science-fiction western role but he fell in love with the pilot script and the character of Shepherd Book.\nPlot.\nBack story.\nThe series takes place in the year 2517, on several planets and moons. The television series does not say if these are in one star system. The movie \"Serenity\" makes clear that all the planets and moons are in one large system. The characters refer to \"Earth-that-was\" and in the movie, it is said that long before the events in the series a large population had left from Earth to a new star system: \"Earth that was could no longer sustain our numbers, we were so many.\" The people settled in this new star system, with \"dozens of planets and hundreds of moons.\" Many of these were terraformed, a process in which a planet or moon is altered to resemble the Earth. The terraforming process was only the first step in making a planet livable. Only the most central planets got more treatment. This caused many of the border planets and moons to have environments that fit the Western setting.\nSynopsis.\nThe show takes its name from the \"Firefly\"-class spaceship \"Serenity\" that the main characters call home. Its tail section lights up during acceleration, looking like the glowing part of a firefly.\nThe Alliance is shown to control the star system through an organization of \"core\" planets. DVD commentary suggests that two main \"core\" planets make up the Alliance. One is mostly Occidental in culture, the other is Asian. This explains the series' mixed linguistic and visual themes. The central planets are under Alliance control, but the outer planets and moons resemble the 19th century American West, with little government control. Settlers people on the outer worlds have relative freedom from the central government. The outer areas also have Reavers, a cannibalistic race.\nThe captain of the crew of \"Serenity\" is Malcolm \"Mal\" Reynolds (Nathan Fillion). The episode \"Serenity\" shows that the captain and his first mate Zoe Washburne (Gina Torres) are veteran \"Browncoats\" of the civil war. A later episode, titled \"Out of Gas\", shows that Mal bought the spaceship \"Serenity\" to continue living beyond Alliance control. Much of the crew's work is made up of cargo runs or smuggling. One of the main story arcs is that of River Tam (Summer Glau) and her brother Simon (Sean Maher). River was a child prodigy. Her brain was experimented on. She seems to have schizophrenia and often hears voices. It is later found out that she is a \"reader\", someone with psychic abilities. Simon gave up a very good career as a surgeon to save her from the Alliance. They join the crew in the original \"Serenity\". Because of this rescue, they are both wanted criminals.\nSignature show elements.\n\"Firefly\" takes place in a multi-cultural future. Because of this, Mandarin Chinese is a common second language. It is used in advertisements, and characters in the show often use Chinese words and curses.\nThe show also has slang not used in today's culture. There are changes to modern words, or new words (\"shiny\" is a synonym of \"cool\"). The Japanese katakana and an Old West dialect are also used.\nOne of the problems that Whedon had with FOX was the tone of the show, especially with the main character Malcolm Reynolds. FOX wanted Whedon to make his character more \"jolly\". They felt he was too dark in the original pilot.\nCast.\nMain characters.\n\"Firefly\" had an ensemble cast that played the nine crew members of the ship, \"Serenity\". These characters fight criminals, Alliance security forces, the insane Reavers, and the mysterious men with \"hands of blue\" - who seem to work for a secret agency which is part of the huge corporation, The Blue Sun Corporation. The crew needs to get enough income to keep their ship working. While doing this, they must stay hidden from people looking for them.\nAll nine major characters are in every episode, with one exception: Book is absent from \"Ariel\"."}
{"id": "45286", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45286", "title": "Purebred", "text": ""}
{"id": "45287", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45287", "title": "Canute", "text": "Canute (or Cnut the Great) (ca. 995\u201312 November 1035) was a Viking King of England, Denmark, Norway, part of Sweden and governor or overlord of Schleswig and Pomerania. Danish influence in the North Sea region was never greater than in his time. He had treaties with the Holy Roman Emperors, Henry II and Conrad II and good relations with the popes of his time.\nCanute was the only man to be King of England, Denmark and Norway. He also ruled part of Sweden.\nConquest of England.\nIn the summer of 1015, Canute's fleet set sail for England with a Danish army of perhaps 10,000 in 200 longships. Cnut was at the head of an array of Vikings from all over Scandinavia. The invasion force was to be in often close and grisly warfare with the English for the next fourteen months. Practically all of the battles were fought against Aethelred's son, Edmund Ironside.\nAfter ascending the throne in 1016, Canute executed many of Edmund's followers, to make his crown safe.\nFamily.\nCanute, a Christian, had two wives. His first wife, or perhaps concubine, was called \u00c6lfgifu. She was a handfast wife, meaning the marriage was made by joining hands, not by a church ceremony. This was legal at that time. She became his northern queen.\nHis second wife was Emma of Normandy, who was also called \u00c6lfgifu in Old English. Their wedding was a Christian wedding. She was kept in the south, with an estate in Exeter.\nBoth wives bore sons who became kings of England. Canute kept the Church sweet with many gifts.\nCanute and the waves.\nThere is a story that Canute sat on his throne ordering the sea to turn back. We do not know whether this really happened. It seems to come from Henry of Huntington (c. 1088 \u2013 c. 1154). He relates it as follows: \n\"When King Cnute had reigned for twenty years, he departed this life at Shaftesbury and was buried at Winchester in the Old Minster. A few words must be devoted to the power of this king. Before him there had never been in England a king of such great authority. He was lord of all Denmark, of all England, of all Norway, and also of Scotland. In addition to the many wars in which he was most particularly illustrious, he performed three fine and magnificent deeds...The third, that when he was at the height of his ascendancy, he ordered his chair to be placed on the sea-shore as the tide was coming in. Then he said to the rising tide, 'You are subject to me, as the land on which I am sitting is mine, and no one has resisted my overlordship with impunity. I command you, therefore, not to rise on to my land, nor to presume to wet the clothing or limbs of your master.' But the sea came up as usual, and disrespectfully drenched the king's feet and shins. So jumping back, the king cried, 'Let all the world know that the power of kings is empty and worthless, and there is no king worthy of the name save Him by whose will heaven, earth, and sea obey eternal laws.' Thereafter King Cnut never wore the golden crown on his neck, but placed it on the image of the crucified Lord, in eternal praise of God the great king. By whose mercy may the soul of King Cnut enjoy rest.\"\nHenry of Huntingdon, \"Historia Anglorum (VI.17)\""}
{"id": "45288", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45288", "title": "Purebred dogs", "text": ""}
{"id": "45289", "revid": "233259", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45289", "title": "Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Saint Henry II (972 \u2013 13 July 1024), called the Holy or the Saint, was the fifth and last Holy Roman Emperor of the Saxon or Ottonian dynasty. "}
{"id": "45293", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45293", "title": "Jacky Chen", "text": ""}
{"id": "45294", "revid": "3316688", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45294", "title": "SMTP", "text": ""}
{"id": "45295", "revid": "177123", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45295", "title": "POP", "text": ""}
{"id": "45296", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45296", "title": "Internet protocol suite", "text": "When computers connect and transmit data between each other on the Internet, they follow a set of rules to do so. These rules are universal; all computers throughout the Internet must follow them. Otherwise, the Internet would not function as computers would not be able to transmit data in a meaningful and useful way. These rules are called protocols. There are many different protocols, each for different purposes, and they all together are called the Internet protocol suite. The two most important protocols are the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP), which ensure data is delivered at the right place, and without errors, and is what computers use when they access servers (computers that have the data that is accessed on the Internet) on the World Wide Web, as well as for email, and the like. Other protocols include the Network Time Protocol, which ensures clock synchronisation in computers, and there are many others.\nThe TCP/IP model and other related protocols are maintained by the Internet Engineering Task Force, whose parent organisation is the Internet Society, and which also cooperates closely with other standards bodies such as the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium) and ISO/IEC."}
{"id": "45297", "revid": "233259", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45297", "title": "Conrad II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Conrad II (c. 990 \u2013 June 4, 1039) was the son of Count Henry of Speyer and Adelheid of Alsace. He was elected king in 1024 and crowned emperor of the Holy Roman Empire on March 26, 1027, the first emperor of the Salian Dynasty.\nDuring his reign, he proved that the German monarchy had become strong enough that it no longer depended on contracts between king and dukes alone."}
{"id": "45299", "revid": "5400", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45299", "title": "Ottonian Dynasty", "text": ""}
{"id": "45300", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45300", "title": "Ottonian dynasty", "text": "Ottonian dynasty was a dynasty of kings of Germany, named after its first emperor Otto I the Great. But it is also known as the Saxon dynasty after the origin of this family of noblemen. The family itself is also sometimes known as the Liudolfings, after its earliest known member \"Liudolf\" and one of its most common names. The Ottonian rulers are also regarded as the first dynasty of the Holy Roman Empire, as successors of the Carolingian dynasty and Charlemagne, who is commonly viewed as the original founder of a new (Frankish) Roman Empire.\nAlthough he was never Emperor, Henry I the Fowler, Duke of Saxony, was the founder of this imperial dynasty, since his election as German king made it possible for his son, Otto the Great to take on the imperium. Since Otto I most of the German kings were also crowned Holy Roman Emperor. Under the reign of the Ottonian rulers, the kingdom of the Eastern Franks finally became Germany as the duchies of Lorraine, Saxony, Franconia, Swabia, Thuringia and Bavaria joined in one empire. \nAfter the end of the Ottonian dynasty (with the death of Henry II in 1024) the crown passed to the Salian dynasty. Luitgard, a daughter of Emperor Otto I had married the Salian Duke Conrad the Red of Lorraine. His great-grandson was Conrad II, Holy Roman Emperor. \nOttonian Kings and Emperors:\nSome other famous members of the Liudolfing or Ottonian House:"}
{"id": "45302", "revid": "1057016", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45302", "title": "Copernicium", "text": "Copernicium (formerly Ununbium) is a chemical element in the Periodic Table. It is also named eka-mercury. It has the symbol Cn. It has the atomic number 112. It is a transuranium element.\nThe element is named in honor of Nicolaus Copernicus.\nUsing periodic trends, people think that it will be a liquid metal. It is likely to be more volatile than mercury.\nHistory.\nCopernicium was first made on February 9, 1996 at the Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Schwerionenforschung (GSI) in Darmstadt, Germany. Copernicium was made by nuclear fusion of a zinc atom with a lead atom. The zinc nuclei was bombarded on to a lead target in a machine named a heavy ion accelerator.\nThe element was made in 2000 and 2004 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Russia.\nIn May 2006 in the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research checked that it had been made using a different method. They identified the last atoms that were made from radioactive decay of copernicium.\nIn February 2010 IUPAC officially approved the name copernicium and symbol Cn."}
{"id": "45303", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45303", "title": "Otto I the Great", "text": "Otto I the Great (23 November 912 \u2013 7 May 973), son of Henry I the Fowler, king of the Germans, and Matilda of Ringelheim, was Duke of the Saxons, King of the Germans and Holy Roman Emperor. He won a big war against the Magyars and later conquered northern Italy."}
{"id": "45305", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45305", "title": "Tropic of Capricorn", "text": "The Tropic of Capricorn, or Southern tropic, is one of the five major circles of latitude of a map of the Earth. It is 23\u00b0 26\u2032 22\u2033 south of the Equator.\nIt marks the most southerly latitude at which the sun can appear directly overhead. This happens at the December solstice, when the southern hemisphere is tilted towards the sun to its maximum extent.\nCountries.\nThe Tropic of Capricorn goes through these countries, starting at the prime meridian and going west:\nHistory.\nThe Tropic of Capricorn is named because about 2000 years ago the sun was entering the constellation Capricornus on the December solstice. Now the sun appears in the constellation Sagittarius during the December solstice. The change is due to precession of the equinoxes. The word \"tropic\" comes from the Greek tropos, meaning \"turn\". This refers to the fact that the sun appears to \"turn back\" at the solstices."}
{"id": "45307", "revid": "5296", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45307", "title": "December solstice", "text": ""}
{"id": "45311", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45311", "title": "Edward III of England", "text": "Edward III (13 November 1312\u201321 June 1377) was a King of England. He ruled for 50 years. \nHe made England the strongest military power during his reign. \nEdward was crowned when he was fourteen years old, after his father was forced to abdicate. After his victory against the Scots, he declared himself heir to the French throne in 1337, and so started the Hundred Years' War. The war went very well for England; the victories of Cr\u00e9cy and Poitiers led up to the Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny, by which he gained a lot of territory. When he became older, he was much less active, mostly a result of his bad health. He died of a stroke in 1377, aged 64.\nEdward also established the Order of the Garter, and developed legislature and government. However, during his reign there was the Black Death. \nEdward and his wife, Philippa of Hainault, had many children and, as they traveled, the children were generally known by where they were born (though the oldest son, Edward \"of Woodstock,\" became known to later generations as Edward, the Black Prince). Prince Edward died before his father Edward III, and his older son, Edward \"of Angouleme,\" had died a child, so younger son Richard \"of Bordeaux\" succeeded Edward III as Richard II of England before being deposed by his cousin Henry IV of England, whose father, John \"of Gaunt\", had married the heiress of Lancaster. His family, the House of Lancaster, fought the Wars of the Roses with the House of York descended from the daughter of Edward III's son Lionel \"of Antwerp\" (who was older than John) over who was the rightful king. \nIn his own time and for centuries after Edward III was praised a lot, but by Whig historians he was seen as an irresponsible adventurer. This view has turned, and modern historians see what a good king he was. "}
{"id": "45312", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45312", "title": "Wicked Science", "text": "Wicked Sciences is an Australian television series. It takes place in Sandy Bay. It tells the story of two teenagers who suddenly become science geniuses.\nStory.\nToby Johnson is a normal student of Sandy Bay High School, juggling between school and the normal life of a teenager. Elizabeth Hawke is the teacher's pet. Nobody like her in the high school and she likes nobody, excepted Tony. She has liked Tony from her childhood. One day, Toby and her were in the laboratory of the school. They were hit by a strange blue ray and they become sciences geniuses. But they do not know why. The normal life of Sandy Bay is changed by the two geniuses.\nDetails on the story.\nOn the first school day at Sandy Bay High School, Toby and his best friend Russel met a new student, Dina Demeris. They quickly became friends. During science class, they were chatting. When they got caught, Dina was the one who was going to be punished, but Toby said that it was his fault. He was to be punished with Russ. The teacher, Mr. Tesslar showed the students the fossils he found during the summer. He started to scan them with a machine and asked who wanted to finish the work. Elizabeth accepted. That evening, Russ, Toby and Elizabeth were in the science laboratory. Toby and Russ had to clean the aquarium, and Elizabeth was scanning the stones. Russ had a bad idea. He tried to use his mouth to change the water. He ran to the restrooms and Toby and Elizabeth cleaned the ground. A frog got out of the aquarium and jumped on the keyboard of the machine. The device scanned a strange blue stone and made a blue ray which hit Toby and Elizabeth."}
{"id": "45313", "revid": "995597", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45313", "title": "Harold Wilson", "text": " \nJames Harold Wilson, Baron Wilson of Rievaulx, KG, OBE, FRS, PC (11 March 1916 \u2013 24 May 1995) was one of the most prominent British politicians of the 20th century. He was an MP from 1945-1983. He won more elections than any other 20th century Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (in 1964, 1966, February and October 1974) \u2014 but only once with a clear majority (1966). \nWilson resigned as Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party in 1976. He died of colon cancer and Alzheimer's disease in 1995."}
{"id": "45314", "revid": "744335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45314", "title": "Labour Party (UK)", "text": "The Labour Party is the main centre-left political party in the United Kingdom. It is a social democratic party. It has been one of the UK's two main political parties from the early 20th century to the present day. It is currently the second largest party in the British House of Commons, with 202 out of 650 seats. It forms the Official Opposition. Its last leader was Jeremy Corbyn. The current Labour Party leader is Sir Keir Starmer, who took over in April 2020.\nThe Labour Party was in power in the United Kingdom government from 1997 to 2010. Now it sits in opposition. It was in power in the Scottish Parliament (in coalition with the Scottish Liberal Democrats) until 2007. It is the largest group in the London Assembly, although until May 2016 the Mayor of London was a Conservative party member. It is also the second largest party in local government.\nPolitical beliefs.\nMost Labour Party supporters believe in the following things:\nHistory.\nThe party was officially formed in 1906, just after the general election, as a successor of the Labour Representative Committee formed in 1900. In 1918, the party made a new constitution with the commitment to socialism, or the socialization of the industry. This could be found in Clause 4.\nThe Labour Party won the general election in 1945 for the first time. From 1951 Labour was in opposition for thirteen years, during which there were serious fights between the left and right wings of the party. The leader of the left wing was Aneurin Bevan. His supporters were called the \"Bevanites\". They wanted a less confrontational policy in foreign affairs and more socialist actions. The leaders of the right wing were Clement Attlee and Hugh Gaitskell. They believed that Western capitalism had changed a lot and that socialism and public ownership was not so important. Gaitskell tried to remove Clause 4 from the party constitution at the 1959 conference, but he could not.\nIn 1994, Tony Blair forced the Labour Party to drop Clause 4. This was an important step to change the party into \"New Labour\".\nIn 2015, dark horse candidate Jeremy Corbyn announced his\u00a0candidacy for the leadership of the Labour Party. At the beginning, he was thought of as a socialist fringe candidate, but he later became the lead candidate in polls and got the support of the majority of\u00a0trade unions affiliated to the Labour Party, along with those of three non-affiliated unions. On 12 September 2015, he was elected\u00a0Leader of the Labour Party, with a majority vote\u00a0of 59.5% in the first round of the ballot."}
{"id": "45315", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45315", "title": "Cyperus papyrus", "text": "Cyperus papyrus (also known as Papyrus sedge, Bulrush or Paper reed) is a plant. It is a sedge. They grow tall. The plant is perennial (grows every year) and originally comes from Africa. It was used to make a fabric much like paper. This was called papyrus, and served much the same purpose that paper does today. Its roots were also used as fuels. Also makes rope and sandals too.\nIt is almost extinct along the shores of the river Nile where it was originally cultivated."}
{"id": "45316", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45316", "title": "Paper reed", "text": ""}
{"id": "45317", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45317", "title": "Papyrus sedge", "text": ""}
{"id": "45318", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45318", "title": "Bulrush", "text": ""}
{"id": "45319", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45319", "title": "Papyrus plant", "text": ""}
{"id": "45320", "revid": "1095217", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45320", "title": "Georgia Institute of Technology", "text": "The Georgia Institute of Technology is a public university (school for after high school) in Atlanta, Georgia. It is also known as Georgia Tech. \nIt focuses primarily on engineering, science and computer science, but also has schools of management, architecture, and liberal arts.\nWhen it opened in 1885, the school's main focus was on practical experience (learning things by doing them); students spent half of their time in class, and half in the shop. \nIt first admitted women in 1952. \nIn 1961, it was the first university in the South to integrate (let people of different races go to school together) without a court order.\nThe school's colors are white and old gold (mustard yellow). Their mascot is Buzz, a Yellow Jacket (a kind of bee-like wasp). "}
{"id": "45343", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45343", "title": "Dissident", "text": "A dissident is a person who does not agree with an opinion, policy, or structure. There are also other types of dissidents like social dissidents who do not agree with popular social attitudes."}
{"id": "45351", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45351", "title": "Hdtv", "text": ""}
{"id": "45352", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45352", "title": "HDTV", "text": ""}
{"id": "45354", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45354", "title": "Josiah", "text": "Josiah was a child king of Judah. He was born around 640 BC. Josiah started his rule as king at the age of 8 when his father, Amon, died. Josiah was thought of as a good king. He following in the steps of his ancestor King David.\nJosiah ruled for 31 years in Jerusalem and died in 609 BC. He was killed by King Necho of Egypt while Josiah was helping the king of Assyria fight off the attacks of the Egyptian. Josiah's son Jehoahaz became the new King of Judah."}
{"id": "45355", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45355", "title": "Jehoahaz of Judah", "text": "Jehoahaz was a king of Judah. His birth name was Shallum. He is thought to be an evil king. Jehoahaz began his rule at age 23 in 609 BC when his father, King Josiah was killed by the king of Egypt, Necho. He only ruled for 3 months in Jerusalem before the Egyptian king took him to Egypt and put another of Josiah's sons on the throne as the new King of Judah. Jehoahaz died in Egypt."}
{"id": "45356", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45356", "title": "King Josiah", "text": ""}
{"id": "45357", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45357", "title": "King jehoahaz", "text": ""}
{"id": "45360", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45360", "title": "Antarctic Circle", "text": "The Antarctic Circle is one of the five major circles of latitude that mark maps of the Earth. It is the parallel of latitude at 66\u00b0 33\u2032 39\u2033 south of the Equator, crossing mostly the Southern Ocean.\nIn the Antarctic Circle, all places have twenty-four hours of daylight on the Summer Solstice in December. In June on the Winter Solstice all places have twenty-four hours of night. There is a minimum of one whole day that the sun does not set and one whole day that the sun does not rise.\nThe area south of this circle is named the Antarctic, and the zone to the north is the Southern Temperate Zone.\nThe continent of Antarctica is a land mass that is most of the area within the Antarctic Circle. The South Pole is in the center of the Antarctic Circle.\nThere is no permanent population of persons south of the Antarctic Circle. There are research centers from some nations on Antarctica. Teams of scientists live in the research centers for part of the year. In past centuries some whaling stations were set up on Antarctica and some of the whalers would live there for a year or more. At least three children have been born in Antarctica. It is one of the coldest places on earth.The lowest temperature ever recorded on earth was recorded in Antarctica (-129.3)"}
{"id": "45362", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45362", "title": "Toast", "text": "Toast is bread which has been grilled until hot and crispy. A toaster, grill or open fire is used. Toasted bread is both darker in color and crunchier than normal bread. Toast can be eaten with a range of condiments spread on the surface, such as butter, jam, honey, and cheese to make cheese on toast, though these are optional as some people prefer their toast without condiments (dry toast).\nToast can also be used to make 'toasties', where a filling is compressed and heated between two slices of buttered bread in a toastie maker. Popular fillings include cheese, jam, peanut butter and chocolate spread.\nPreparation.\nBefore the invention of modern cooking appliances such as toasters and grills, bread has been produced in ovens for millennia. Toast can be made in the same oven. \nMany brands of sliced bread are available, some specifically marketing their suitability for toasting."}
{"id": "45363", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45363", "title": "Toaster", "text": "A toaster is a machine that cooks bread. The bread is put into the toaster and after a few minutes it pops up, toasted. The pop-up toaster was invented by Charles Strite in 1919."}
{"id": "45365", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45365", "title": "Swiss cheese", "text": "Swiss cheese is a name for a number of cheeses that are like Swiss Emmental cheese. This name is mostly used in the United States and Canada, and in most cases, the cheeses are made there and are not from Switzerland. Like it, they have holes, which are made by the bacteria that change milk into Swiss cheese. \"Propionibacterium\" uses the lactic acid that is made by other bacteria, and it gives off a gas called carbon dioxide. This slowly forms bubbles that become the holes. The holes in the cheese are called the \"eyes\", and a Swiss cheese that does not have holes is called a \"blind\" cheese.\nMost often, Swiss cheeses with larger eyes have a better taste, as the same things that make the eyes bigger also make the taste of the cheese better. These include longer time and more warmth as the cheese is formed.\nEmmental cheese has been produced in France, Germany, and Austria for a long time. This is why the names Emmental and Swiss Cheese can be used for kinds of cheese that are not made in Emmental in Switzerland but are made the same way. "}
{"id": "45366", "revid": "17988", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45366", "title": "Henry VI of England", "text": "Henry VI (6 December 1421 - 21 May 1471) was King of England upon the death of Henry V on 31 August 1422 to 1461 and then from 1470 to 21 May 1471. He was also the King of France from 1422 to 1453.\nThe King.\nHenry was the only child of King Henry V of England and was his heir. He was born on 6 December 1421 at Windsor. He became king at the age of nine months on 31 August 1422, when his father died. His mother, Catherine of Valois, was then only twenty years old. Because she was the daughter of King Charles VI of France, and France had been the enemy of England, the English people did not trust her and she was not allowed to have a large part in raising her son.\nHumphrey, Duke of Gloucester, Henry IV's youngest son, was given the position of \"Protector and Defender of the Realm and the Church\" (Regent of England) until the King was old enough to rule. His job was to keep the peace and deal with Parliament. Henry IV's oldest living son, John, Duke of Bedford, was made the Regent of France. He was in charge of running the war that was happening. Bedford also replaced Gloucester as Regent of England whenever he was in England.\nCoronation.\nHenry was eventually made King of England at Westminster Abbey on 6 November 1429 a month before his eighth birthday. He was made King of France at Notre Dame in Paris on 16 December 1431. Because he was a child he was not allowed to control the government until he was declared of age on his sixteenth birthday in 1437, the same year his mother died.\nHenry's marriage to Margaret of Anjou.\nBecause of his success in the Hundred Years' War, Henry V had left England with a lot of land in France. Since Henry VI was still a child, and England was ruled by a Regent, much of the land his father gained was lost. Diplomatic mistakes as well as military failures caused the loss of most of the English land in France.\nHenry VI was a deeply spiritual man and was not very interested in politics. He let his court be controlled by a few noblemen who were called his \"favourites\". The people who wanted to end the war in France became more powerful, and Henry went along with them. Henry VI was told that the best way of get peace with France was to marry Margaret of Anjou, who was a niece of King Charles VII of France. Charles agreed to let Henry marry Margaret as long as he did not have to give her a dowry and was given the lands of Maine and Anjou by the English. Henry agreed, but did not let Parliament know about giving away Maine and Anjou, thinking that the English people would not be happy to know that the land was being given away to France.\nThe marriage happened in 1445. Margaret was much the opposite of Henry. She was ready to take decisions and lead while he was happy to be led by her. Margaret was a stronger ruler than Henry ever was, even though she was only sixteen at that time.\nDeath and legacy.\nHenry VI was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he was murdered on 21 May 1471. Popular legend said that Richard, Duke of Gloucester was guilty of his murder, as well as the murder of Henry VI's son Edward of Westminster.\nKing Henry VI was originally buried in Chertsey Abbey. In 1485, his body was moved to St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.\nHe was succeeded by Edward IV, son of Richard, Duke of York."}
{"id": "45373", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45373", "title": "Saint Fons", "text": ""}
{"id": "45374", "revid": "6925111", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45374", "title": "Saint-Fons", "text": "Saint-Fons is a French city next to Lyon. About 15.000 people live there. The name of the city does not come from a saint. It is because there are many fountains near the city. Originally the place name was \"Cent Fonts\" ( 100 sources), which was changed into the current city name. The city split from V\u00e9nissieux in the middle of the 19th century. The main reason for splitting was because of the chemical industry in the spot."}
{"id": "45376", "revid": "224035", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45376", "title": "Incidental music", "text": "Incidental music is music which has been written for a play. It is not like opera where there is usually music all the way through. Incidental music will be used between scenes or for particularly important moments in the play or for songs sung by the actors. It is called \u201cincidental\u201d because the music is not as important as the play.\nIncidental music was used as long ago as the time of Ancient Greece. It was used in the 16th and 17th centuries, especially in the plays of Shakespeare whose characters often sing songs. At this time incidental music was used more often for comedies than for tragedies. Tragedies were about important people who were busy ruling their country and having wars. In the plays they spoke in verse and were too noble to sing. People thought that comedies were more suitable for including music. The songs were often sung by actors playing the parts of shepherds, nymphs or clowns.\nIn later centuries music was used for all types of serious drama. Sometimes large orchestras were used. Many famous composers wrote music to be played by an orchestra during plays. A famous example is the incidental music for Shakespeare\u2019s \u201cA Midsummer Night's Dream\u201d composed by Felix Mendelssohn in 1842. Other composers worked with living poets such as Goethe and Schiller. Beethoven wrote music for Goethe\u2019s play \"Egmont\". This music is very closely linked to what happens in the story: the overture describes the harshness of the Spanish oppression of the Netherlands which is what the play is about. Schubert\u2019s famous \"Rosamunde\" overture comes from a play called \"Die Zauberharfe\" (\"The Magic Harp\"). Schumann\u2019s music for \"Manfred\" is different: it was never intended to be performed with the play, it was just inspired by Schumann\u2019s imagination. Many other composers wrote incidental music, e.g. Sibelius (for Maeterlinck\u2019s play \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\") and Grieg (for Ibsen\u2019s play \"Peer Gynt\").\nIn all these examples the music is now usually heard at concerts, not as part of the original play. Most of them have overtures (music played before the play starts) and these overtures are often performed separately, very often at the start of concerts.\nIncidental music was not used so much during the 20th century although the plays of Brecht, which are often about political propaganda, needed a new kind of popular music. Brecht worked with composers like Weill and Eisler who understood the kind of message that he wanted in his plays. Their music for Brecht\u2019s plays is similar to cabaret music.\nNowadays electronic music is often used in plays."}
{"id": "45377", "revid": "3650", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45377", "title": "Petr Cech", "text": ""}
{"id": "45380", "revid": "22653", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45380", "title": "Kayak", "text": "A kayak is a small boat that is driven by manpower. It typically has a covered deck, and a cockpit covered by a spraydeck. It is propelled by a double-bladed paddle by a sitting paddler. The kayak was used by the native Ainu, Inuit, Aleut and Eskimo hunters in sub-Arctic regions of northeastern Asia, North America and Greenland. Modern kayaks come in a wide variety of designs and materials for specialized purposes.\nKayaks typically are built for one, two or occasionally three paddlers who sit facing forward in one or more cockpits below the deck of the boat. The spray skirt or similar waterproof garment attaches securely to the edges of the cockpit, so that no water from waves or spray may enter the boat. Therefore, in most styles the boat can roll upright again without it filling with water or ejecting the paddler.\nKayaks differ distinctly in design and history from canoes, which are craft propelled by single-bladed paddles by a kneeling paddler, although some modern canoes may be difficult for a non-expert to distinguish from a kayak. Kayaks are often called canoes in Great Britain and Ireland."}
{"id": "45383", "revid": "269932", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45383", "title": "Eskimo", "text": ""}
{"id": "45389", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45389", "title": "Canoe", "text": "A canoe is a small boat, that is often driven by manpower or womanpower, but also commonly sailed. Canoes are pointed at both ends and usually open on top, but can be covered. Canoes are known as \"Paddle boats\" in some small towns in the south of Australia. The use of a paddle or \"salvatore\" is used to propel the vehicle. The most famous of rowers include the Szwedo of Luke in which he was the first man to complete 4 laps the woodend river in less than 3 days, beating the record of 4 laps in 4 days.\nThe canoe is propelled by the use of paddles, with the number of paddlers depending on the size of the canoe (most commonly 2). Paddlers face in the direction of travel, either seated or kneeling. In this way paddling a canoe can be contrasted with rowing, where the rowers face away from the direction of travel. Paddles may be single-bladed or double-bladed."}
{"id": "45393", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45393", "title": "Paddle", "text": "A paddle is a tool used for pushing against liquids, either for propulsion in a boat or for mixing liquids.\nPaddles commonly used in canoes consist of a wooden, fibreglass or metal rod (the \"shaft\") with a handle on one end and a rigid sheet (the \"blade\") on the other end. Paddles for use in kayaks are longer, with a blade on each end, and usually no handles. "}
{"id": "45395", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45395", "title": "Mahdi", "text": "The Mahdi or Mehdi ('the rightly-guided one') is Islam's messiah or savior. It is said that he and the Prophet Jesus will change the world for the better, bringing God in all hearts, before Yaum al-Qiyamah (\"Day of the Resurrection\"). \nIn particular, the Sudanese tribal leader Muhammed Ahmed proclaimed himself as the Mahdi, appointed by Allah to free his country. He defeated the forces of the Khedive of Egypt and the British, only to die suddenly six months later."}
{"id": "45396", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45396", "title": "Propulsion tools", "text": "Propulsion is the use of force to make movement.\nFor ground propulsion the first instrument was the wheel.\nFor water propulsion pole, paddle, oar and sail have been used. Nowadays the most common types are underwater propellers. Sails are still common, and historically represented the most important form of early propulsion for large ships. \nFor air propulsion, the most common types are propeller and jet engine. Others have been used experimentally."}
{"id": "45397", "revid": "5400", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45397", "title": "Propulsion", "text": ""}
