{"id": "5075", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5075", "title": "Vietnam", "text": "Vietnam () is a country in Southeast Asia. The long-form name of the country is the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The neighboring countries of Vietnam are China, Laos and Cambodia. Vietnam is one of five remaining countries that believe in communism. The capital of Vietnam is Hanoi. The biggest city is Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon). There are about 94,444,200 people living in Vietnam.\nAfter the Japanese occupation in the 1940s, the Vietnamese fought French colonial rule during the First Indochina War between the Viet Minh and the French in 2 September 1945. H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh declared Vietnam's independence from France under the new name of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, but was fought by French colonialists. In 1954, the Vietnamese declared victory in Dien Bien Phu which took place between March and May 1954 and culminated in a major French defeat. Then Vietnam was divided into two political states, North Vietnam (officially the Democratic Republic of Vietnam) and South Vietnam (officially the Republic of Vietnam). Conflicts between the two sides intensified in the so-called Vietnam War with strong influence from the US in South Vietnam. The war ended in 1975 with a North Vietnamese victory.\nVietnam was then united under a communist government. In 1986, the government launched a number of economic and political reforms that began Vietnam's path to integration into the world economy. By 2000, it had established diplomatic relations with all nations. Since 2000, Vietnam's economic growth has been among the highest in the world, and in 2011 it had the highest global growth generator index among 11 major economies. Its successful economic reforms resulted in its becoming a member of the World Trade Organization in 2007. It is also a member of economic cooperation between Asia and the Pacific and the International de la Francophonie Organization.\nPopulation.\nIn Vietnam, the approximate population is 97,094,658. 25.2% of these people are aged between 0-14, with 11,954,354 being male and 10,868,610 being female. 69.3% of the population are between the ages of 15-64. The male-to-female ratio is almost evenly split, with 31,301,879 being male and 31,419,306 being female. 5.5% are 65 and over, with 1,921,652 being male and 3,092,589 being female. So within the older two categories, there are more women than men. \nThe population is not from one origin. There are many ethnic tribes that developed in the history of Vietnam. This makes Vietnam's history and culture very diverse. It's not the same as a country where every family landed on the country's shores in the same century. French and Chinese colonization didn't involve an excessive migration of people to Vietnam. \nNowadays, the blend of cultures has been increasing with the influence of globalization and world interest. Many Vietnamese that have been living overseas are described as the Viet Kieu. The population has several communities in many countries around the world.\nGeography.\nThe length of the country, from North to South, is 1,650\u00a0kilometers (1,025\u00a0miles). \"At its narrowest point, Vietnam is only 30\u00a0miles (48\u00a0kilometers) wide\".\nThe country is covered in rainforests that are currently going through rapid deforestation. It borders the South China Sea to the east, Laos and Cambodia to the west, and China to the north. The country is slightly larger than Malaysia.The country is slightly smaller than Japan\nHistory.\nVietnam's history has long been characterized by the neighborhood of China in the north. For about 1,000 years, northern Vietnam belonged to China, but from 938 the country became independent and later expanded southward at the expense of the Champa kingdom. In the 19th century the country was colonized by France and during the Second World War, the country was occupied by Japan. After this war, the colonial empire did not have the resources to restore the regime and lost the military battle against the liberation forces. This led to the division of the country, which in turn led to the Vietnam War with major human and material losses for the country. The war ended on 30 April 1975 by the fact that North Vietnam took the southern part. After experimental planning in the 1970s and 1980s, the economy was reformed in a market economy direction.\nViet.\nAbout 5000 years ago, the two ethnic tribes of the Lac Viet and Au Viet lived together in many areas with other inhabitants. Due to increasing needs to control floods, fights against invaders, and culture and trade exchanges, these tribes living near each other tended to gather together and integrate into a larger mixed group.\nAmong these Lac Viet tribes was the Van Lang, which was the most powerful tribe. The leader of this tribe later joined all the tribes together to found Van Lang Nation in 2897\u00a0BC, addressing himself as the King Hung. The next generations followed in their father's footsteps and kept this appellation. Based on historical documents, researchers correlatively delineated the location of Van Lang Nation to the present day regions of North and north of Central Vietnam, as well as the south of present-day Kwangsi (China). The Van Lang Nation lasted to the 3rd century B.C.\n\u00d3c Eo may have been a busy port of the kingdom of Funan between the 1st and 7th centuries.\nThe Dong Son civilization that covered much of Southeast Asia was also the beginning of Vietnam's history. In 221\u00a0BC, the Qins invaded the land of the Viet tribes. Thuc Phan, leader of the alliance of Au-Viet tribes managed to expel the enemies and declared himself King An Duong Vuong and his territory Au Lac Nation (257-207\u00a0BC). In 208 BC, a Qin Dynasty general named Tri\u1ec7u \u0110\u00e0 invaded Au Lac. An Duong Vuong failed this time. As a result, the northern feudalist took turns dominating the country over the next eleven centuries, establishing their harsh regime in the country and dividing the country into administrative regions and districts with unfamiliar names. However, the country's name of Au Lac could not be erased from the people's minds in their everyday life.\nIn 207 BC Tri\u1ec7u \u0110\u00e0 established a state called Nam Vi\u1ec7t which encompassed southern China and the Red River Delta. The historical significance of the original Nam Vi\u1ec7t remains controversial because some historians consider it a Chinese occupation while others believe it was an independent era. For most of the period from 111 BCE to the early 10th century, Vietnam was under the rule of successive Chinese dynasties. Sporadic independence movements were attempted, but were quickly suppressed by Chinese forces.\nThe kings of Champa (Chi\u00eam Th\u00e0nh in Vietnamese) started construction of Hindu temples at M\u1ef9 S\u01a1n in the 4th century AD.\nH\u1ed9i An was founded as a trading port by the Nguy\u1ec5n Lord Nguy\u1ec5n Ho\u00e0ng sometime around 1595.\nWork on Imperial City, Hu\u1ebf started in 1804.\nIndoChina.\nIn September 1858, France occupied \u0110\u00e0 N\u1eb5ng. Cochinchina was a French colony from 1862 to 1948.\nIn 1930 Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1i Qu\u1ed1c established the Vietnamese Independence League (\"Vi\u1ec7t Nam \u00d0\u1ed9c L\u1eadp \u00d0\u1ed3ng Minh H\u1ed9i\") which is also known as the Vi\u1ec7t Minh.\nThe Japanese took over Vietnam in World War II. The Vi\u1ec7t Minh fought against both the Japanese and the Vichy French.\nWhen the Japanese were defeated, the Vietnamese people, led by the Vi\u1ec7t Minh started the August Revolution.\nOn 2 September 1945, Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1i Qu\u1ed1c (who was now calling himself H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh, meaning 'H\u1ed3 (a common last name) with the will of light') read the Declaration of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in Ba \u00d0\u00ecnh Square, in H\u00e0n\u1ed9i. It was based on the American Declaration of Independence.\nH\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh led the Vi\u1ec7t Minh in a war for independence from France.\nThe \"Autonomous Republic of Cochinchina\" (\"R\u00e9publique Autonome de Cochinchine\") was proclaimed 1 June 1946 to frustrate the Vi\u1ec7t Minh's desire to rule all of Vietnam.\nThe War between France and the Vi\u1ec7t Minh lasted from 1946 to 1954. The French were defeated in 1954 after the Battle of Dien Bien Phu.\nNorth and South Vietnam.\nThe nation was then divided into North Vietnam and South Vietnam. After independence was achieved, the French gave the land of the Mekong delta that was part of Cambodia to South Vietnam. The anti-communist United States had a lot of influence in the South, and the communist and nationalist Vi\u1ec7t Minh controlled the North. H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh was extremely popular in the whole nation, as he was the only remaining leader after years of fighting, so he became President of the Democratic Republic of (North) Vi\u1ec7tnam. It was agreed that the nation would be reunited by elections in 1956. But, the Americans and the Southern government stopped the elections from happening because they expected H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh to win because communist North Vietnam refused to hold free elections. Dwight Eisenhower said he thought H\u1ed3 would win with around 80% of the vote if elections were held because of the majority of the population being in the north added with Ho's few supporters in the South.\nSoon, the USA was at war with Vietnam. This war was known as the American War, the Vietnam War, or the Second Indochinese War. Soon, South Vietnam became a military dictatorship with some basic freedoms. The Southern army removed the controversial Ngo Dinh Diem from power and killed him.\nOn 2 September 1969, Independence Day, President H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh died of heart failure.\nUnification.\nOn 30 April 1975, the National Liberation Front with the help of the N.V.A. overtook S\u00e0ig\u00f2n, which was the capital of South Vietnam and quickly renamed it H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh City. The nation was fully reunified as Socialist Republic of Vietnam on 2 July 1976.\nProvinces.\nVietnam is divided into 58 provinces. There are also five city municipalities which have province authority.\nThe provinces of Vietnam are divided (by the government) into provincial cities and provinces.\nScience and technology.\nMedia said in 2011 that investment in science and technology was 2% of GDP.\n\"Vietnam provides no incentives for students to return to Vietnam from their foreign graduate programmes\" was the opinion (in 2011) of French physicist Pierre Darriulat."}
{"id": "5077", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5077", "title": "Lance Armstrong", "text": "Lance Edward Armstrong (born September 18, 1971 in Plano, Texas, USA) is an American former bicycle rider. He used drugs which helped him in competition. In 2012 the US Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) took away all his titles from 1998 to 2006. In 2012, he was also banned forever from cycling competitions.\nBefore his titles were taken away, he won the Tour de France seven times in a row, from 1999 to 2005. He did this several years after having brain surgery, testicular surgery, and a long course of chemotherapy in 1996. The chemotherapy was to treat testicular cancer that spread to his brain and lungs. Armstrong used to race for the Discovery Channel Pro Cycling Team, but was only team leader during the Tour de France.\nArmstrong retired from professional cycling in 2011."}
{"id": "5085", "revid": "768749", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5085", "title": "Ton", "text": "Ton might refer to"}
{"id": "5093", "revid": "148798", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5093", "title": "Phoebe (moon)", "text": " \nPhoebe is a moon which goes around (orbits) the planet called Saturn. It takes eighteen months for Phoebe to go all the way around Saturn. It is half made out of rock, and half made out of ice. The ground on Phoebe is black, which means that it is very dark when seen from Earth. Phoebe does not have any air, and there is no water on its surface.\nThere are many craters on Phoebe. These are from asteroids and other things crashing into it, and leaving round marks on the surface.\nPhoebe is slightly irregular, which means that it is not perfectly round like a ball. It has an average diameter of 213\u00a0km. This means that the Earth's moon is 15 times bigger than Phoebe. The duration between two sunrises (rotation period) is only 9 hours and 16.5 minutes long. "}
{"id": "5098", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5098", "title": "Three Peaks Challenge", "text": "The Three Peaks Challenge is a challenge (a hard task or job) which involves climbing three British mountains (a peak is the top of a mountain) in less than 24 hours. The three mountains are the highest of each of the three countries in the island of Great Britain.\nEach year many people attempt (try) to do the challenge to raise money for charity. They do this by getting their friends and family to sponsor them (give them money). Many people do not do the challenge for charity. They do it simply because they enjoy walking in the mountains and they want to try something hard. These people usually do it in small groups. Some of them will do the walking, and others will do the driving and the cooking for them. Some people have completed the challenge very quickly. The record is fifteen hours.\nReasons why some people do not like the challenge.\nRecently, the challenge has become more popular. People who live near the mountains often do not like having cars around in the middle of the night. Conservation groups blame people doing the challenge for dropping litter and damaging the landscape. Some people park their cars in inconsiderate places. Thousands of people attempt the challenge each year. Supporters of the challenge say that only a few people cause these problems, and most behave well.\nThe usual route.\nMost attempts are made in the summer, because the days are long and the weather is good. In the winter it is dark for most of the day and can be very cold. The weather up the mountains can change very quickly, and some people die in blizzards (storms of snow) in the winter. Most people who attempt the challenge use the same route, because it is the easiest way of doing the challenge in 24 hours.\nThey start with Ben Nevis at about five o'clock. It takes about three hours to climb this mountain, so they reach the summit (the top) at about eight o'clock, and return to the bottom at about ten o'clock. In the summer it is still light in Britain at this time. If people start climbing Ben Nevis too early they will arrive at Scafell Pike too early the next morning and it will still be dark. It is important to be quick at the bottom of the mountains. There is not much time so food is usually prepared by others waiting at the bottom. When the climbers arrive they usually leave immediately and eat while they are on the road.\nThe next mountain is Scafell Pike, in the Lake District of northern England. The journey between Ben Nevis and Scafell Pike is longer than the journey between Scafell Pike and Snowdon. This is why it is done at night, when it is too dark to climb. The journey takes six or seven hours, and the walkers usually go to sleep. The next morning they arrive at Scafell Pike at about half past four. In the summer it is light by this time. Scafell Pike is not as high as the other mountains, but is harder.\nIf it is climbed quickly enough and the walkers do not get lost they can return to the bottom by about nine o'clock. It takes several hours to get to Snowdon in Wales. The walkers are usually very tired and worried that there is not enough time. If they arrive at the bottom of Snowdon at half past one in the afternoon they can climb it in two hours. This leaves them an hour and a half to get back to the bottom. If they were too slow on the other mountains or the journeys in between they might have to run!\nYou need to be quite fit to do the challenge in 24 hours, but people who are young and active, and people who are used to hillwalking, can do it. Compared to some mountains in the world, all the mountains in Britain are small. If the weather is bad or the drivers are slow it is very hard."}
{"id": "5099", "revid": "1144862", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5099", "title": "Pennsylvania", "text": "Pennsylvania is one of the 50 states in the United States of America. It is in the northeastern part of the country. It has a border with Ohio on the west, West Virginia on the south and west, Maryland and Delaware on the south, New Jersey on the east, and New York and Lake Erie on the north.\nThe state capital of Pennsylvania is Harrisburg. The largest city in Pennsylvania is Philadelphia. The state nickname of Pennsylvania is \"The Keystone State\". The current governor of Pennsylvania is Tom Wolf.\nPennsylvania is well known for its role in the American Revolution, its large communities of Amish, and its heavy industry.\nHistory.\nPennsylvania was home to many Native American groups before Europeans settled there. These include the Delaware, Susquehanna, and Iroquois.\nThe first European settlers in Pennsylvania were from Sweden. They arrived in 1643. The area was later ruled by the Netherlands and Great Britain. In 1681, Charles II of England, gave the land to William Penn. Penn used the land to create a home for Quakers. The land became known as \"Penn's Woods\", as Pennsylvania has many forests. In Latin this is \"Pennsylvania\". This became adopted as the name of the colony.\nMeanwhile, in the western part of the state, armies from France and Great Britain fought for control of the source of the Ohio River. This conflict was part of the French and Indian War. Great Britain eventually won the conflict for this location and built a fort called Fort Pitt. The fort grew into a city which is now called Pittsburgh.\nThe state of Delaware was once part of Pennsylvania. In 1704, Delaware formed when three Pennsylvania counties left the colony and created their own government.\nPennsylvania was one of the 13 colonies that fought Great Britain in the American Revolution. The United States Declaration of Independence was signed in Philadelphia. Benjamin Franklin, an important figure in the Revolution, was also from Philadelphia. Pennsylvania was the second state to join the United States. Philadelphia was capital of the United States before Washington, D.C..\nLater, Pennsylvania became an important center of industry. Kerosene was discovered in Titusville in the 19th century. This was the start of the oil industry in the United States. Large deposits of coal were found in and around Pittsburgh. This caused Pittsburgh to become a major industrial city.\nIndustry began leaving Pennsylvania in the late 20th century, because most heavy industry was being transferred to other nations. Many people left, too. It also caused many of its cities and towns to decay.\nGeography.\nMost of Pennsylvania is part of the Appalachian Mountains, including the south central and northeastern areas of the state. Much of the rest of the state is very hilly, partly due to the closeness to mountains and partly due to the steep river valleys in the state. The Monongahela, Allegheny, and Ohio rivers are in the western part of the state, and the Susquehanna is in the central part of the state. The northwestern and southeastern parts of the state are mostly flat and low-lying.\nPennsylvania is the 33rd largest states in the United States, with a land area of 44,817 square miles. The highest point in the state is Mount Davis, at 3,213 feet above sea level. The lowest point is the Delaware River, which is at sea level.\nDemographics.\nPennsylvania is the 5th most populated state. In 2020, there were 13,002,700 people.\nMore than half of the people live in the areas of Pittsburgh and Philadelphia. Few people live in the north central area of the state. Towns and cities tend to be small in size and densely populated, more so than in other states. This is because many of the towns and cities in Pennsylvania were built around a specific factory or factories.\nEducation.\nPennsylvania has many colleges and universities. Officially, the state's public university is Pennsylvania State University. Best known are a few private university systems which are partially (around 10%) funded by the state, like University of Pittsburgh. The state's most well-known private university is the University of Pennsylvania, an Ivy League institution. Pennsylvania also has a number of state run colleges in Bloomsburg, California, Cheyney, Clarion, East Stroudsburg, Edinboro, Indiana, Kutztown, Lock Haven, Mansfield, Millersville, Shippensburg, Slippery Rock, and West Chester. Those fourteen schools make up one of the largest state run higher education systems in the country. Other significant private universities are Carnegie-Mellon University, known for its computer science research, and Bucknell University."}
{"id": "5100", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5100", "title": "Gases", "text": ""}
{"id": "5102", "revid": "1132954", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5102", "title": "Box", "text": "A box is a container used to put things in. It is mainly a cuboid (square) shape, but it can be other shapes too. Boxes are usually made out of cardboard, wood, plastic or metal.\nMany boxes are made of cardboard, and a lot of them are made. They are primarily used for packaging commercial goods or storing goods and materials. They can be made from bent or wrinkled cardboard. In their most obvious life stage, they are popularly used as a cheap material to hold a range of projects, among them being science experiments, children's toys, costumes and other things.\nA box also means a rectangle, \"e.g. userbox\". But rectangles are mainly referred to as rectangles, the term box is the outline, or perimeter of the rectangle."}
{"id": "5103", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5103", "title": "Philippines", "text": "The Philippines is an island country in Southeast Asia in the Pacific Ocean. It has 7,641 islands. Spain (1521-1898) and the United States (1898-1946), colonized (controlled) the country and Palau, which is on the eastern side of the Philippine Sea. The capital city of the Philippines is Manila.\nThe Philippines and East Timor are the only nations in East Asia where most people are Christians. The Philippines achieved independence after the United States left in 1946.\nThe Philippine Islands are surrounded on the east by the Philippine Sea, on the west by the South China Sea, and on the south by the Celebes Sea. Borneo island is a few hundred kilometers to the southwest, Vietnam is to the west, and Taiwan is directly north.\nPolitics.\nThe government of the Philippines, is similar to the Government of the United States of America. The President of the Philippines works as the head of state, the head of government, and the commander in chief of the Military of the Philippines and the armed forces. The president is elected by voting just as in America except by popular vote as there is no electoral voting. He stays as the president for 6 years. He is the leader of the cabinet.\nThe bicameral Philippine legislature, the Congress of the Philippines, consists of the Senate of the Philippines and the House of Representatives of the Philippines; members of both are elected by popular vote. There are 24 senators serving 6 years in the Senate while the House of Representatives consists of no more than 250 congressmen each serving 3-year terms.\nThe judiciary branch of the government is headed by the Supreme Court of the Philippines, which has a Chief Justice as its head and 14 Associate Justices, all appointed by the president.\nThe Philippines is a founding and prominent member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). It is also an active participant of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), a member of the Group of 24 and one of the 51 founding members of the United Nations on October 24, 1945.\nRegions and States.\nLocal Government. The parts of Philippines are \"local government units\" (LGUs). The province is the top unit. There are 79 provinces in the country (2002). In the provinces there are cities and municipalities (towns). In these municipalities there are smaller \"barangays\" (villages). The \"barangay\" is the smallest local government unit.\nAll provinces are in 17 regions for administration (organisation). Most government offices have regional offices for the provinces. The regions do not have a separate local government, except for the Muslim Mindanao and Cordillera regions, which have their own power (autonomous government).\nRegions.\n\u00b9 Names are capitalized because they are acronyms, containing the names of the constituent provinces or cities.\nGeography.\nThe Philippines has 7,701 islands. Together there are about 300,000 square kilometers of land. The islands are in three groups: Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. Luzon is the largest island and Mindanao is the second largest. The Visayas are the group of islands in the central part of the Philippines. The busy port of Manila, on Luzon, is the country's capital and it is the second-largest city after Quezon City. Cebu City and Davao City are the largest cities in Visayas and Mindanao, respectively.\nThe climate is hot, humid (there is a lot of water in the air), and tropical. The average temperature all year is around 26.5\u00a0\u00b0Celsius. Filipinos usually say there are three seasons: \"Tag-init\" or \"Tag-araw\" (the hot season or summer from March to May), \"Tag-ulan\" (the rainy season from June to November), and \"Tag-lamig\" (the cold season from December to February).\nThe Philippines is in the Pacific Ring of Fire (zone of frequent earthquakes and volcanic eruptions). Most of the mountainous islands had a lot of tropical rainforests a long time ago. They started as volcanoes. The highest place is Mount Apo on Mindanao at 2,954 m. Many volcanoes in the country, for example Mount Mayon, are active. The country also has about 19 typhoons per year.\nTaal Volcano is an island in Taal Lake. It is in an ancient caldera in Batangas Province. It is about 2 hours by bus going south from Manila. The jump-off point in Talisay is suitable for day trips and overnighters.\nProblems.\nThere are many environmental problems in the Philippines. One of them is overfishing in many areas, which lead to pitiful catches. Another problem is that only ten percent of sewage is treated and cleaned, while the other 90% is dumped back to nature and the ocean, which leads to pollution. Deforestation is a serious problem, and after decades of cutting down forests, illegal logging and forest fires, there is only 3% left of original forest cover. Forest losses have also affected the Philippines with serious soil erosion, which is threatening the Philippines biodiversity.\nEconomy.\nThe Philippines is a developing country. In 1998 the Philippine economy \u2014 a mixture of agriculture, light industry, and support services \u2014 deteriorated because of the effects of the Asian financial crisis and poor weather conditions. The economy's growth fell to 0.6% in 1998 from 5% in 1997, but recovered to about 3% in 1999 and 4% in 2000. As of 2012, it's estimated at 6.6%.\nThe government has promised to continue its economic reforms to help the Philippines match the pace of development in the newly industrialized countries of Southeast Asia. The strategies are improving infrastructure, fixing the tax system to help the government income, supporting deregulation (to remove government control) and privatization of the economy, and increasing trade within the region. Future prospects depend heavily on the economic performance of the three major trading partners, China, the United States and Japan.\nPeople.\nAround 94 million people live in the Philippines as of 2010. Most people in the Philippines are of Austronesian stock. The ethnic Chinese, who have helped run businesses since the 9th century, also live in the country. Its now 105 million people there. The Negritos live in the mountains of Luzon and Visayas. Luzon has a lot of mestizo people, a Spanish term for someone of mixed Hispanic and native blood.\nThe people of the Philippines are known as \"Filipinos\". Filipinos are divided into many groups, the three largest are the Tagalogs, Cebuanos, and the Ilocanos. When the Philippines was a colony, the term \"Filipino\" used to mean the Spanish and Spanish-mixed minority. But now everyone who is a citizen/national of the Philippines is called \"Filipino\". Even then, it is still has the most diverse ethnic groups in Asia, the other being Indonesia. People also call Filipinos \"Pinoy\" for short.\nLanguages.\nFilipino and English are the official languages. Filipino is based largely on Tagalog, a native language spoken in Metro Manila and neighboring provinces. The Filipino language, is a cousin of the Malay language. Other local languages and dialects are Cebuano and Ilocano and many others. English is used in government, schools and business. Other languages are Chinese which is spoken by the ethnic Chinese population and the Chinese-Filipinos. Most of the Muslims living deep in southern Mindanao and the smaller islands off of the southern Philippine mainland near Malaysia's northeastern tip. They also speak Arabic as a second language but to a very small extent. Spanish, once the official language of the Philippines in the 1970s is also spoken by a notable minority of Filipinos.\nCulture.\nBefore the Spanish arrived, the Filipinos did not think of themselves as one culture. Most of the Philippines were Buddhist, Muslim and Hindu. The Spaniards came in 1565, and brought with them Spanish culture. They soon spread to the islands making forts and schools, preaching Christianity, and converting most of the native people to the Catholic religion. When the United States colonized the islands in 1898, the Americans brought with them their own culture, which has the strongest influence up to now. This makes the Philippines the most Westernized country in eastern Asia. The Spanish culture in the Philippines though, is not directly from Spain but from Mexico, since the Philippines was ruled by Spain, through Mexico. It was governed from Mexico City which explains much of the Spanish influence in the Philippines that one could only find in Mexico and not in Spain. Also, the Spanish that was spoken in the Philippines was Mexican Spanish, not European Spanish. A lot of the foods in the Philippines can also be found in Mexico. Filipinos, as a tradition, usually eat with hands, like that of Malay tradition. And most of Filipino cuisine is also of Malay influence for the most part.\nEach year major festivities called \"barrio fiestas\" are held. They commemorate the Patron saints of the towns, villages and regional districts. The festivities includes church services, street parades, fireworks displays, feasts, dance/music contests, and cockfights. Circumcision of males is a tradition and a big cultureal event, nearly 91,7% are circumcised.\nReligion.\nMost of the people in the Philippines are Christians. About 92% of the people are Christians. Most people in the Philippines belong to the Roman Catholic faith (70%). A sizable percentage of the people are Protestants (many diverse Christian denominations) (17%), Iglesia ni Cristo (2%), Muslims (5-10%), Buddhists (2%). There are also some Hindus and some other minor religions with fewer adherents (6.6%)."}
{"id": "5108", "revid": "7809857", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5108", "title": "Fawlty Towers", "text": "Fawlty Towers is a British television sitcom. It was broadcast by the BBC in two series, one in 1975, the other in 1979. Only twelve episodes were ever broadcast. However, the show is still liked by millions of people. \"Fawlty Towers\" has influenced other comedies.\nIt is set in a hotel in the coastal Devon town of Torquay.\nMain characters.\nThe owners of the hotel are Basil Fawlty (played by John Cleese) and his wife Sybil (Prunella Scales).\nThey are helped by Polly, a young British maid (Connie Booth) and Manuel, a clumsy waiter from Barcelona in Spain (Andrew Sachs).\nIn series two there is also a chef, Terry (Brian Hall).\nBasil is a rude, angry man, who fought in the Korean War. He has been married to Sybil for fifteen years. Sybil and Basil do not love each other. Polly has a talent for painting, and this is shown in some episodes when her artwork is laid upon the front desk, annoying Basil. Manuel speaks only a little English and he often makes mistakes due to misunderstanding things. When he makes a mistake Basil usually apologises to the guests by saying, \"I'm so sorry, he's from Barcelona.\"\nOther characters.\nThe Major (Ballard Berkeley) is a regular guest. He is old and forgetful. The aged and easily shocked Miss Tibbs (Gilly Flower) and Miss Gatsby (Renee Roberts) are also regular guests.\nEpisodes.\nThere were twelve episodes of \"Fawlty Towers\" made.\nThe first six episodes were made in 1975, the last six in 1979. \"Fawlty Towers\" still has many fans, and many people regard it as the best comedy series made by the BBC. It was voted 5th in a poll in Britain to find \"Britain's Best Sitcom\" 2004.\nOne of the most famous episodes is \"The Germans\". In that episode, people from Germany are visiting the Hotel. Basil dislikes Germans, because he blames them for starting World War II. He tells his staff not to mention the war (\"Don't mention the war!\"). He himself continually mentions the war, and even imitates Adolf Hitler.\nThe episodes, in order with date of first showing, are:"}
{"id": "5110", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5110", "title": "Custom", "text": "A custom (also called a tradition) is a common way of doing things. It is something that many people do, and have done for a long time. Usually, the people come from the same country, culture, or religion. Usually, they do not know when the custom started.\nMany customs are things that people do that are handed down from the past and the Future.\nExamples of it are: "}
{"id": "5111", "revid": "39458", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5111", "title": "Fort Ouiatenon", "text": "Fort Ouiatenon was the first fortified European settlement in what is now the U.S. state of Indiana. It is approximately three miles southwest of modern-day West Lafayette.\nFort Ouiatenon was originally constructed by the French government in 1717 as a military outpost to protect against Great Britain's western expansion. Its location among the unsettled woodlands of the Wabash River valley also made it a key center of trade for fur trappers. French merchants and trappers from Quebec would arrive at Fort Ouiatenon in search of beaver pelts and to take advantage of trade relations with the native Wea Native American tribes.\nAt its peak level of activity during the mid-18th century Fort Ouiatenon was home to over 2,000 residents. In 1761, during the French and Indian War, a contingent of British soldiers led by Lieutenant Edward Jenkins captured and occupied the fort. In 1763 an uprising led by Chief Pontiac of the Ottawa Native American tribe surprised Lieutenant Jenkins and his men and captured Fort Ouiatenon without firing a shot. Seven similar posts were also captured in what became known as Pontiac's Uprising.\nThe British made little use of Fort Ouiatenon after the French and Indian War; it was never garrisoned. During the 1780s, local Indian tribes used it as a base of operations to stage raids against American settlers pushing westward. Consequently, President George Washington ordered the fort to be destroyed in 1791.\nIn 1930 a replica of Fort Ouiatenon was built near its original site by a local physician named Richard Wetherill. In 1970 the site was placed on the National Register of Historic Places by the U.S. Department of the Interior. Today Fort Ouiatenon is open to tourists and is the location of the annual Feast of the Hunters' Moon."}
{"id": "5113", "revid": "1141341", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5113", "title": "Chennai", "text": "Chennai (formerly known as Madras) is the capital city of the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. It has a population of about 7 million people. Almost 10% of all of the people in the state live in Chennai. The city is the fourth largest city of India. It was founded in 1661 by the British East India Company. The city is on the Coromandel Coast of the Bay of Bengal.\nChennai is the automobile capital of India. It is also referred as the Detroit of South Asia. The long Marina Beach in Chennai, is one of the longest beaches in the world. The city is separated into three parts by two rivers. The Cooum River divides the city into almost half and the Adyar River divides the southern half of the city into two parts. The historic Buckingham Canal runs through the city. It is almost parallel to the coast. The 350 year old city still has much of its old charm. Today, it is a big commercial and industrial centre. The city has much cultural heritage. The temples, shrines, forts and palaces of the city combine its past with the present.\nHistory.\nChennai and its nearby area has been an important administrative, military and economic centre back to the 1st century. Many South India kingdoms like the Pallava, the Chola, the Pandya and Vijayanagara Empires have ruled over the area. The British controlled the town in 1749. Under British control, the city grew into a major urban centre and naval base. The city grew up around the English settlement of Fort Saint George. It slowly grew in the nearby towns and villages. Chennai became the capital of Madras state (renamed as Tamil Nadu in 1968) when India became independent in 1947.\nAccessibility.\nChennai is connected by airways, railways and roads with all the major towns of the country.\nRoads.\nChennai is linked with roads from rest of the country. The distance of major cities and towns from Chennai are: \nRailways.\nChennai railway station is connected with all the major railway stations of the country. These include Delhi, Mumbai, Calcutta, Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Cochin, Hyderabad, Lucknow, and Varanasi.\nAirport.\nThe airport in Chennai is directly linked to airports of Delhi, Mumbai, Calcutta, Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Goa, Bhubaneswar, Cochin, Hyderabad, Port Blair and Pune.\nThe international terminal is connected with other overseas airports including London, Tokyo, Brussels, Singapore, Dubai, Frankfurt, Kuala Lumpur and New York.\nIt is one of the busiest airports in Asia."}
{"id": "5114", "revid": "7833524", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5114", "title": "Mumbai", "text": "Mumbai (previously known as Bombay until 1996) is a natural harbour on the west coast of India, and is the capital city of Maharashtra state. It is India's largest city, and one of the world's most populous cities. It is the financial capital of India and a global city. Many billionaires live there. The city is the second most-populous in the world. It has approximately 13 million people. Along with the neighbouring cities of Navi Mumbai and Thane, it forms the world's 4th largest urban agglomeration. They have around 19.1 million people\nThe seven islands that form Bombay were home to fishing colonies. The islands were ruled by successive kingdoms and indigenous empires before Portuguese settlers took it. Then, it went to the British East India Company. During the mid-18th century, Bombay became a major trading town. It became a strong place for the Indian independence movement during the early 20th century. When India became independent in 1947, the city was put into Bombay State. In 1960, following the Samyukta Maharashtra movement, a new state of Maharashtra was created with Bombay as the capital. It was renamed Mumbai in 1996.\nMumbai generates more than 6% of India's GDP. It accounts for 25% of industrial output, 40% of sea trade, and 70% of capital transactions to India's economy. The Reserve Bank of India, the Bombay Stock Exchange, the National Stock Exchange of India and many Indian companies and multinational corporations are in the city. It also has the Hindi film and television industry, known as Bollywood.\nPublic transport in Mumbai.\nThe Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport is Mumbai's public transport service."}
{"id": "5115", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5115", "title": "Bangalore", "text": "Former Bangalore (English pronunciation: \u02c8b\u00e6\u014b\u0261\u0259l\u0254\u0259r, b\u00e6\u014b\u0261\u0259\u02c8l\u0254\u0259r), today again and officially known as Bengaluru () is the capital city of the Indian state of Karnataka. It is famous for its Information technology industry and so it is called the Silicon Valley of India. Today as a large and growing city, Bangalore has many of the most well-recognized colleges and research institutions in India.\nBangalore is more famous for its climatic conditions. The temperature is usually low compared to the other cities in Karnataka.This city was also known as the garden city because of the greenery it had. "}
{"id": "5116", "revid": "7888899", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5116", "title": "Akbar the Great", "text": "Akbar (Abu'l-Fath Jalal ud-din Muhammad Akbar, 15 October 1542 \u2013 27 October 1605) was the 3rd Mughal Emperor. He was born in Umarkot (now Pakistan). He accepted Islam on the holy day of 21 March 1546. He was the son of 2nd Mughal Emperor Humayun.\nAkbar became the \"de jure\" king in 1556 at the age of 13 when his father died. Bairam Khan was appointed as Akbar's regent and chief army commander. Soon after coming to power Akbar defeated Himu, the general of the Afghan forces, in the Second Battle of Panipat. After a few years, he ended the regency of Bairam Khan and took charge of the kingdom. He initially offered friendship to the Rajputs. However, he had to fight against some Rajputs who opposed him. In 1576 he defeated Maha Rana Pratap of Mewar in the Battle of Haldighati. Akbar's wars made the Mughal empire more than twice as big as it had been before, covering most of the Indian subcontinent except the south.\nAdministration.\nAkbar's system of\u00a0central government\u00a0was based on the system that had evolved since the\u00a0Delhi Sultanate, but the functions of various departments were reorganised with detailed regulations for their functioning\nReligious Policy.\nAkbar was a Muslim. He realized that to establish a strong empire, he had to gain the confidence of his Hindu people who were the majority in India.\nDin-i-ilahi was a religious path suggested by Akbar. It was a code of moral conduct which reflected Akbar's secular ideas and he desire to achieve peace, unity, tolerance in his empire. Belief in one god, worship of source of light, non-killing of animals, Having peace with all were some features of Din-i-ilahi. It didn't have any rituals, holy books, temples or priests.\nMale circumcision was not to be done before the boy was 12 years old, and after that it was optional. It was a Jewish custom adopted by Islam. Akbar's rule was that it should be made optional and should be done, if at all, at an age when boys could understand what it was. Here Akbar gave every man a choice and opportunity to have a play of his reason. Indeed, the boy of reason as he was, he could not deny it to others. He was a very good emperor and he had a sense of justice.\nWhen he was at Fatehpur Sikri, he held discussions as he loved to know about others' religious beliefs. On one such day, he got to know that the religious people of other religions were often bigots (intolerant of others religious beliefs). This led him to form the idea of the new religion, Sulh-e-kul meaning \"universal peace\". His idea of this religion did not discriminate other religions and focused on the ideas of peace, unity and tolerance. This gesture of his made the Hindus and people of other religions call him with different names and start loving him.\nPersonality.\nAkbar's reign was chronicled by his court historian\u00a0Abul Fazal\u00a0in the books\u00a0\"Akbarnama\"\u00a0and\u00a0\"Ain-i-Akbari\". Other sources of Akbar's reign include the wod Sirhindi. Akbar was an\u00a0artisan,\u00a0warrior,\u00a0artist,\u00a0armourer, administrator carpenter,\u00a0emperor,\u00a0general,\u00a0inventor,\u00a0animal trainer, technologist. He became emperor at the age of 18.\nNavaratnas.\nAkbar had Navaratnas or nine jewels in his court which include Abul Fazl, Faizi, Tansen, Birbal, Raja Todar Mal, Raja Man Singh, Abdul Rahim Khan-I-Khana, Fakir Aziao-Din and Mullah Do Piazza.\nAkbarnama.\nThe\u00a0Akbarn\u0101ma means the\u00a0\"Book of Akbar\". It is the official biographical account of Akbar written by\u00a0Abu Fazl. It includes vivid and detailed descriptions of his life and times. It also includes the information about the flora, fauna, life of the people of his reign, and the places Akbar used to visit.\nThe work was commissioned by Akbar, and written by\u00a0Abul Fazl, one of the Navratnas (Nine Jewels) of Akbar's royal court. The book took seven years to complete. An illustration was done in the\u00a0Mughal school of painting. A part of this is \"Ain-i-Akbari\".\nDeath.\nOn 3 October 1605, Akbar fell ill with an attack of\u00a0dysentery, from which he never recovered. Twelve days after his sixty third year he died on 27 October 1605, after which his body was buried at a mausoleum in\u00a0Sikandra (Agra): Akbar's tomb."}
{"id": "5117", "revid": "1060941", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5117", "title": "New Delhi", "text": "New Delhi () is the capital of India and a union territory of the megacity of Delhi. It has a very old history and is home to several monuments where the city is expensive to live in. In traditional Indian geography, it falls under the North Indian zone. The city has an area of about . New Delhi has a population of about 9.4 Million people."}
{"id": "5118", "revid": "7883673", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5118", "title": "Edmund Hillary", "text": "Sir Edmund Percival Hillary , (born 20 July 1919, died 11 January 2008) was a New Zealand mountaineer and explorer. He and Sherpa guide Tenzing Norgay were the first people to climb Mount Everest. They got to the top on 29 May 1953. Mount Everest is the tallest mountain on Earth. During his teenage years, Hillary had attended Auckland Grammar School.\nSir Edmund Hillary's fame came as a result of being the first New Zealander in the world to conquer Mt. Everest in Nepal. He is on the New Zealand five dollar note. He also climbed ten other mountains after Mount Everest, all of which are also in the Himalayas.\nEarly life.\nHillary was born to Percival Augustus Hillary and Gertrude Hillary, n\u00e9e Clark, in Auckland, New Zealand, on 20 July 1919. His family moved to Tuakau (south of Auckland) in 1920, after his father (who served at Gallipoli) had gotten land there. His grandparents were early settlers in northern Wairoa in the mid 19th century after moving from Yorkshire, England.\nHillary learned at Tuakau Primary School and then Auckland Grammar School. He finished primary school two years early, but he did not do very well at high school. At first, he was smaller than other students there and very shy so he felt safe with his books and often thought of a life filled with adventure. Every day, he rode a train to and from high school, and he often used this time to read. Learning how to box helped him become more confident. At age 16 his interest in climbing started during a school trip to Mount Ruapehu. Although very tall at 6\u00a0ft 5 in (195\u00a0cm), he was stronger than many of his fellow hikers.\nHe learned about mathematics and science at The University of Auckland, and in 1939 he completed his first important climb, which was reaching the top of a mountain called Mount Ollivier. With his brother Rex, Hillary became a beekeeper during summertime, which allowed him to do climbing in the winter.\nPersonal life.\nHillary married Louise Mary Rose in 1953, by whom he had a son and two daughters. In 1975, his wife and their younger daughter were killed in a plane crash. Hillary married June Mulgrew in 1989; they remained married until he died.\nDeath.\nHillary died of a heart attack in Auckland, at the age of 88."}
{"id": "5119", "revid": "7844796", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5119", "title": "Wright brothers", "text": "The Wright brothers, Orville Wright (August 19, 1871 \u2013 January 30, 1948) and Wilbur Wright (April 16, 1867 \u2013 May 30, 1912), designed, built, and flew the first controlled, powered, heavier-than-air airplane on December 17, 1903. They had been experimenting for many years with gliders and other vehicles before their first powered flight. They are also known for making the first way to steer an airplane. They designed the aircraft in Dayton, Ohio, and their first test flight was in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.\nBefore building airplanes.\nThe Wrights grew up in Dayton, Ohio. They were sons of a minister. There were many books in their house, and they were encouraged to ask questions and discover whatever they thought was interesting. Sometimes their father would ask them to argue for a topic, then switch sides and argue for the opposite point of view.\nThey went to high school, but did not go to college; they started a newspaper instead. After that, they started a shop to build and repair bicycles.\nLearning how to fly.\n\u201cBy the 1890s, the Wrights were interested in flight, especially the gliders of Otto Lilienthal. They started working on making airplanes in their bicycle shop. They thought controlling a plane was one of the big problems of flight. Lilienthal and others had been killed when they could not control their aircraft. The Wright brothers fixed the problem by inventing control surfaces, such as a rudder that would work in the air. They built wings that could be twisted a little and moved up and down slightly, to control flight. They called this steering system \"wing-warping\".\nFrom 1900 to 1902, they built gliders in Dayton and tested them in Kitty Hawk, where there were strong and steady winds. They also made small versions of the wings and built a wind tunnel for model airplanes to test how well different wing shapes would lift an airplane.\u201d\nFlying.\nIn 1903, they built a powered airplane that had propellers and a small engine. The \"Wright Flyer\" airplane first flew successfully on December 17, 1903, near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. This was the first time people ever flew a powered airplane they could control. Before that, people flew in balloons or gliders, or for a very short time in planes they could not control. The two brothers continued to make changes to their design and had a very good plane by 1905.\nThe Wright Brothers kept their discovery largely secret for a couple of years, until they showed it to the world in 1908 (They had filed a patent on their steering system March 23, 1903.)\nAfter that, they started a company to build airplanes. They had a patent war with Glenn Curtiss, filing lawsuits against each other over who really invented the airplane steering system. The Wrights believed that Curtiss' aileron system was too similar to their own steering system and that he had copied them. During the patent war, Wilbur died. Orville continued working to keep his reputation as the first man to fly. Later he sold the airplane company and became an elder statesman of aviation. He died in 1948."}
{"id": "5120", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5120", "title": "Thomas Alva Edison", "text": ""}
{"id": "5121", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5121", "title": "Charles Darwin", "text": "Charles Robert Darwin (12 February 1809 \u2013 19 April 1882) was an English naturalist. He was born in Shrewsbury, Shropshire. He is famous for his work on the theory of evolution.\nHis book \"On the Origin of Species\" in 1859. In this book, he put forward much evidence that evolution had occurred. He also proposed natural selection as the way evolution had taken place. \nDarwin did not know about genetics: he never read the work of Gregor Mendel. Nevertheless, Darwin's explanation of evolution was fundamentally correct. In contrast to Lamarck, Darwin's idea was that the giraffe's neck became longer because \"those with longer necks survived better\".p177/9 These survivors passed their genes on, and in time the whole species got longer necks.\nVoyage of the HMS \"Beagle\".\nDarwin spent almost five years on board a Royal Navy exploring ship, the HMS \"Beagle\". He was the guest naturalist, which meant that he was responsible for making collections and notes about the animals, plants, and the geology of the countries they visited. The ship's crew made charts of all the coastal areas, which could be used by the navy wherever it went in the world. At the time, Britain had by far the largest navy in the world, and an empire which was global.\nDarwin collected everywhere the ship landed. He found huge fossils of recently extinct mammals, experienced an earthquake in Chile, and noticed the land had been raised. He knew of raised beaches elsewhere, high in the Andes, with fossil seashells and trees which had once grown on a sandy beach. Obviously the earth was constantly changing, with land rising in some places, and sinking in others. He collected birds and insects, and sent shipments back to Cambridge for experts to identify.\nDarwin was the first dedicated naturalist to visit the Galapagos Islands, off the west coast of Ecuador. He noticed that some of the birds were like mockingbirds on the mainland, but different enough to be placed in separate species. He began to wonder how so many new species came to be on these islands.\nWhen Darwin got back to England, he edited a series of scientific reviews of the voyage, and wrote a personal journal which we know as \"The Voyage of the Beagle\". It is one of the great natural history travel diaries.\nIn 1843 Darwin, who already had two children with his wife Emma, bought Down House in the village of Downe, Kent. He lived there for the rest of his life, and today the house and contents are open to the public.\nEvolution.\nWhile on the H.M.S. \"Beagle\", and later back home in London, Darwin had come across the ideas of the Rev. T.R. Malthus. Malthus had realised that, although humans could double their population every 25 years, it did not happen in practice. He thought the reason was that a struggle for existence (or resources) limited their numbers. If numbers increased, then famine, wars and diseases caused more deaths. Darwin, who knew that all living things could, in principle, increase their numbers, began to think about why some survived, while others did not.p264-268 His answer took years to develop.\nThe theory of evolution says that all living things on Earth, including plants, animals and microbes, come from a common ancestor by slowly changing throughout the generations. Darwin suggested that the way living things changed over time is through \"natural selection\". This is the better survival and reproduction of those that best fit their environment. Fitting into the place where you live is called adapting. Those who fit best into the place where they live, the best adapted, have the best chance to survive and breed. Those who are less well-adapted tend not to survive. If they do not survive well enough to raise young, this means they do not pass on their genes. In this way, the species gradually changes.\nThe first chapter of the \"Origin\" deals with domesticated animals, such as cattle and dogs. Darwin reminded readers of the huge changes mankind had made in its domestic animals, which were once wild species. The changes were brought about by \"selective breeding\" \u2013 choosing animals with desirable characters to breed from. This had been done generation after generation, until our modern breeds were produced. Perhaps what man had done deliberately, might happen in nature, where some would leave more offspring than others.\nDarwin noticed that although young plants or animals are very similar to their parents, no two are exactly the same and there is always a range of shape, size, colour, and so on. Some of these differences the plant or animal may have got from their own ancestors, but some are new and caused by mutations. When such differences made an organism more able to live in the wild, it would have a better chance to survive, and would pass on its genes to its offspring, and they to their offspring. Any difference that would cause the plant or animal to have less of a chance to live would be less likely to be passed on, and would eventually die out altogether. In this way groups of similar plants or animals (called species) slowly change in shape and form so that they can live more successfully and have more offspring who will survive them. So, natural selection had similarities to selective breeding, except that it would happen by itself, over a much longer time.\nHe first started thinking about this in 1838, but it took a full twenty years before his ideas became public. By 1844 he was able to write a draft of the main ideas in his notebook. Historians think that he did not talk about his theory because he was afraid of public criticism. He knew his theory, which did not discuss religion, raised questions about the literal truth of the Book of Genesis. Whatever the reason, he did not publish his theory in a book until 1859. In 1858 he heard that another biologist, Alfred Russel Wallace, had the same ideas about natural selection. Darwin and Wallace's ideas were first published in the \"Journal of the Linnaean Society\" in London, 1858. Then, Darwin published his book the next year. The name of the book was \"On the Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection, or the preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life\". This is usually called \"The Origin of Species\".\nOther works.\nDarwin wrote a number of other books, most of which are also very important."}
{"id": "5122", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5122", "title": "Adam Smith", "text": "Adam Smith (16 June 1723 \u2013 17 July 1790) was a Scottish economist, who is called the Father of Modern Economics.\nHis book, \"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations\", published in 1776, was very important. People call the book just \"The Wealth of Nations\". It stated some of the ideas on which modern economics is based off, especially market economics.\nIn the \"Wealth of Nations\" Adam Smith asks 'what can a person do that is best for his country?' He decides that if every person does what is best for themself and their little circle of family and friends, then the country will do better. This is because every person knows a lot about their own situation (what they need and what they want, what works and what does not work), much more than the government knows. This sort of thinking is called \"liberal theory\", a main part of liberalism.\nHe was also a philosopher who wanted to know why people thought (felt) that some things are good and others bad. \nHe wrote an earlier book, in 1759, called \"The Theory of Moral Sentiments\". He thought that empathy was very important in ethics. Empathy is when you see how someone else is feeling, imagine what it feels like, and then end up feeling the same way: for Smith, empathy is like \"putting yourself in someone else's shoes\". For example, empathy makes us feel happy to see someone else who is happy, or feel sorry for someone who is sad. Empathy may even make \"us\" feel pain when we see someone in pain (as if \"we\" had been hurt or affected). Both Smith and his friend David Hume, who was another Scottish philosopher, wrote about the importance of sympathy in ethics."}
{"id": "5123", "revid": "7876498", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5123", "title": "Isaac Newton", "text": "Sir Isaac Newton (25 December 1643\u00a0\u2013 20 March 1726/27) was an English physicist, mathematician and astronomer. He is well known for his work on the laws of motion, optics, gravity, and calculus. In 1687, Newton published a book called the \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" in which he presents his theory of universal gravitation and three laws of motion.\nNewton built the first practical reflecting telescope in 1668. He also developed a theory of light based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the colors of the rainbow. Newton also shares credit with Gottfried Leibniz for the development of calculus. \nNewton's ideas on light, motion, and gravity dominated physics for the next three centuries, until modified by Albert Einstein's theory of relativity.\nAfter being knighted in 1705 because he was Master of the Royal Mint, he was \"Sir\" Isaac Newton.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nIsaac Newton was born (according to the Julian calendar, in use in England at the time) on Christmas Day, 25 December 1642 (N.S. 4 January 1643) \"an hour or two after midnight\", at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire, England. His father, also named Isaac Newton, died three months before his birth. When Newton was three, his mother, Hannah Ayscough, remarried with Reverend Barnabas Smith. Young Newton remained with his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough.\nFrom 1655 to 1659, Newton was educated at The King's School, Grantham. When he was seventeen, he was removed from school. His mother tried to make him a farmer, but he did not like that. Henry Stokes, master at The King's School, requested his mother to send him back to school.\nIn June 1661, he was sent to the University of Cambridge to study.\nEarly discoveries.\nIn 1666 Isaac Newton experimented with light, and found that different colours had different refractions. He began lecturing on this topic in 1670.\nNewton explained the workings of the universe through mathematics. He described laws of motion and gravitation. These laws are math formulas that explain how objects move when a force acts on them. Newton published his most famous book, Principia, in 1687 while he was a mathematics professor at Trinity College, Cambridge. In the Principia, Newton explained three basic laws that govern the way objects move. He then described his idea, or theory, about gravity. Gravity is the force that causes things to fall down. If a pencil fell off a desk, it will land on the floor, not the ceiling. In his book Newton also used his laws to show that the planets revolve around the suns in orbits that are oval, not round. Newton also discovered diffraction. This led him to enter the field of physics, where he prospered.\nNewton's Three Laws Of Motion.\nFollowing are the three laws of motion.\nThe discovery of the Law of Gravitation.\nWhen most people think of Isaac Newton, they think of him sitting under an apple tree watching an apple fall. Some people believe the apple fell onto his head. Newton understood that what makes things like apples fall to the ground is a specific kind of force \u2014 the force we call gravity. Newton thought that gravity was the force of attraction between two objects, such as an apple and the earth. He also thought that an object with more matter exerted the same force on smaller objects as they exerted on it. That meant that the large mass of the earth pulled objects toward it. That is why the apple fell down instead of up, and why people do not float in the air.\nIsaac Newton went on thinking about gravity. Before Newton, people thought that only objects near to the earth would fall down. But Newton thought that gravity should not just be limited to the earth and the objects on it. What if gravity went to the moon and beyond?\nNewton invented a formula for calculating the force of attraction between two bodies. He used it to calculate the force needed to keep the moon moving around the earth. Then he compared it with the force that made the apple fall downward. After allowing for the fact that the moon is much farther from the earth, and has a much greater mass, he discovered that the forces were the same. The moon is held in an orbit around the earth by the pull of earth\u2019s gravity.\nThe formula invented by Newton is called the \"Law of gravitation\".\nImpact.\nSir Isaac Newton\u2019s calculations changed the way people understood the universe. No one had been able to explain why the planets stayed in their orbits. What held them up? Less than 50 years before Isaac Newton was born it was thought that the planets were held in place by an invisible shield. Isaac proved that they were held in place by the sun\u2019s gravity. He also showed that the force of gravity was affected by distance and by mass. He was not the first to understand that the orbit of a planet was not circular, but more elongated, like an oval. What he did was to explain how it worked.\nIsaac Newton was the first to discover the laws of gravitation and the laws of motion. He also established a new field in mathematics known as calculus, though the German Gottfried Leibniz had developed the ideas at the same time. His work has greatly contributed in the areas of science and mathematics making him one of the most influential scientists in human history and one of the greatest mathematician of all times.\nThe great physicist, Albert Einstein, thought that Newton's idea of gravity was not completely accurate. He corrected many of the things that Newton did.\nDeath.\nIsaac Newton died on in London, England.\nHe is buried in Westminster Abbey. He set the stage for many famous physicists to come, such as Albert Einstein, James Chadwick, and Stephen Hawking."}
{"id": "5125", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5125", "title": "Johann Wolfgang von Goethe", "text": "Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (August 28, 1749 \u2013 March 22, 1832) was a German writer, poet, novelist, and playwright. He also worked as an actor, administrator, scientist, geologist, botanist, and philosopher. He influenced many 19th century writers and thinkers. His contributions to science include his work in botany and his \"Theory of Colours\". Famous lines from his books are often quoted, and some of his phrases have become part of the German language. His poems were set to music by composers like Schubert, Schumann, Brahms, Wolf, and Strauss. Most of his scientific work now seems old-fashioned. \nEarly life.\nGoethe was born in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. His father was well-educated and very strict. His mother was only eighteen when he was born. When Goethe was a young boy, he began to write stories and plays for his friends. In his youth, he learned Greek, Latin and French. He studied law in Leipzig from 1765 to 1768. He also wrote some letters that are seen as beautiful, and that showed his promise as a writer. He continued his studies in Strasbourg from 1770 to 1771. He joined other young men who wanted to change the way that Germans were writing. He thought that people like Johann Christoph Gottsched were too strict about writing poetry. Instead of the ideas of the Enlightenment, he wanted poets to be creative and make their own rules.\nOne man who had many new ideas was a poet named Johann Gottfried von Herder. Herder liked the plays of Shakespeare (which he had learned in German) as well as folk poetry. These ideas were exciting for Goethe, and he helped Herder to collect folk poetry. Both men believed that poetry should always come from the heart, and that it should be based on the poet\u2019s experiences instead of on an old-fashioned idea of what a good poem should be. Some of Goethe's best known poems were written during this time, like \"Heidenr\u00f6slein\", \"Der K\u00f6nig in Thule\", and \"Erlk\u00f6nig.\"\nGoethe fell in love with several women during his lifetime. During the early period of his life, he was in love with a girl named Friederike Brion, the daughter of a pastor. Several of his poems are inspired by her. He felt extremely sad when they split up. The feeling of desertion by a lover is found in a lot of Goethe\u2019s works. They are all based on his own experience. His disappointment in love inspired him when writing about Werther in \"Die Leiden des jungen Werthers\" and Gretchen in his great play \"Faust\". His poems also show his ideas about science and philosophy.\n\"Die Leiden des jungen Werthers\" (\"The Sufferings of Young Werther\") is a book written in the form of letters. Werther is a young man who falls passionately in love with a girl called Lotte who is married to someone else. Werther kills himself in the end. The book was very successful all over Europe. People talked about \u201cWerther fever.\u201d Many young men who were disappointed in love copied Werther and killed themselves.\nGoethe\u2019s most famous work is a very long play called \"Faust\". He spent most of his life working at it. He was writing the first version of \"Faust\" at this time. Based on a legendary character, it tells of a man called Faust who is tired of studying and wants to have the greatest possible happiness. The devil (called Mephistopheles in the play) tells Faust he can help him to do this, but that in the end Faust must give him his soul and go with him to hell. Faust uses magic in the hope that it will tell him everything about life.\nAlong with writing, Goethe was developing a career in law. In 1772, he spent four months in Wetzlar at the Imperial Law Courts. Here he made new friends, including a young girl who was already engaged to someone else.\nMiddle Period: Arrival in Weimar until death of Schiller (1775-1805).\nGoethe had been well-educated and was good at organizing and getting on with important people. For eleven years he worked at the court of Weimar for a young Duke called Karl August. He became a member and later the president of the Duke\u2019s cabinet. He had to organize road-building projects, and look after parks and buildings. He studied geology, mineralogy, botany and anatomy. He fell in love with a woman called Charlotte von Stein who was married and had several children. He wrote love letters to her, and she inspired him to write many poems. At this time he felt that a man\u2019s task in life was to be useful. The heroes of his books at this time were often ordinary people instead of geniuses. \nAfter a time he realized that all his work on governmental duties were not giving him time for his writing, so he went to Italy for 18 months. He loved the landscape and made lots of sketches, and he read the ancient poets and books on the history of art. He wrote a play in rhyme called \"Iphigenie auf Tauris\" which combines the beauty of Classicism with great poetry.\nWhen he returned from Italy he settled once more in Weimar. He visited Italy a second time. He became great friends with the famous poet and playwright Friedrich Schiller. The two men talked about many of their ideas and helped one another by offering criticism of their works. He wrote short works such as \"Hermann und Dorothea\" which is about life in a small German town at the time of the French Revolution. \nTwo works of the greatest importance works occupied him at this time. One is the novel \"Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre\". This is an example of what is called in German a \u201cBildungsroman\u201d which means something like \u201cEducation novel\u201d. It means a novel which shows a person growing up and developing his character and learning about the world. This book was a very important influence on the 19th century Romantic novel and on all German autobiographical novels ever since. Goethe spent many years working on this book.\nThe second work of enormous importance was his play \"Faust\". He made changes to the original version, putting all the small bits together into one great play. Schiller gave him advice while he was writing it. Faust enters into a pact with the devil, Mephistopheles who promises him all his soul can wish for: fine living, gold, women and honour. He signs the pact with his blood.\nLater life (1805-1832).\nNapoleon was fighting wars all over Europe at this time. Germany, which was still made up of lots of small countries, was an enemy of France. Goethe always thought of Napoleon as a hero. His ideas about politics were still based on 18th century ideas. He hated war and so he did not take part in politics but concentrated on science and literature. He wrote a book called \"Die Wahlverwandtschaften\" (\"Elective Affinities\") which is about a divorce problem. Some of his scientific ideas are used in the story as he talks about the way that two chemical compounds can break up and form new unions. He compares this to the people in his story. His poems in \"West\u00f6stlicher Divan\" are some of his greatest. He uses ideas from Persia and other Eastern countries together with ideas from the West. It has a lot of parables about human life.\nMany interesting things that Goethe said were written down in a book by his friend Eckermann, who published them in a book called \"Conversations with Goethe\". Goethe also wrote about his own life in his autobiography which he called \"Dichtung und Wahrheit\" (\"Poetry and Truth\"). The book tells us about his youth up to the time of his arrival in Weimar. It is in four parts. The fourth part was published after his death. He chose the title to show that he was telling us the truth about his life, but that he had changed the order of some events to make it into a poetic book.\nGoethe wrote a sequel (a part which follows on) to \"Wilhelm Meister\" called \"Wilhelm Meisters Wanderjahre\" (\"The Years of Wilhelm Meister\u2019s Wanderings\"). It consists of several sections which are like separate stories. They tell us about Wilhelm Meister\u2019s relationship with society and how he has to change his ways to fit in with other people.\nGoethe\u2019s \"Faust\" had made him the greatest person in European literature. At the end of his life he finished a second part of \"Faust\". It is quite hard to read, and is more of a long poem than a dramatic play. It talks of his ideas about allegory, science and philosophy.\nGoethe died in Weimar on March 22, 1832. He had started as a great Classical writer of the 18th century and finished as a young Romantic of the 19th century. No one else had such a big influence on art and literature of that time."}
{"id": "5126", "revid": "19514", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5126", "title": "Afganistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "5127", "revid": "1060941", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5127", "title": "Pythagoras", "text": "Pythagoras of Samos was a famous Greek mathematician and philosopher ( ). He is known best for the proof of the important Pythagorean theorem, which is about right angle triangles. He started a group of mathematicians, called the Pythagoreans, who worshiped numbers and lived like monks. He had an influence on Plato.\nHe had a great impact on mathematics, theory of music and astronomy. His theories are still used in mathematics today. He was one of the greatest thinkers of his time.\nPythagoras was born in Samos, a little island off the western coast of Asia Minor. There is not much information about his life. It is said that he had a good childhood. Growing up with two or three brothers, he was well educated. He did not agree with the government and their schooling, so he moved to Crotone and set up his own cult (little society) of followers under his rule. His followers did not have any personal possessions, and they were all vegetarians. Pythagoras taught them all, and they had to obey strict rules.\nSome say he was the first person to use the term philosophy. Since he worked very closely with his group, the Pythagoreans, it is sometimes hard to tell his works from those of his followers.\nReligion was important to the Pythagoreans. They swore their oaths by \"1+2+3+4\" (which equals 10). They also believed the soul is immortal and goes through a cycle of rebirths until it can become pure. They believed that these souls were in both animal and plant life.\nHis beliefs.\nPythagoras' most important belief was that the physical world was mathematical and that numbers were the real reality.\nPythagorean theorem.\nPythagoras is most famous for his theorem to do with right triangles. He said that the length of the longest side of the right angled triangle called the hypotenuse (C) squared would equal the sum of the other sides squared. And so a\u00b2 + b\u00b2 = c\u00b2 was born. There are many different proofs for this Pythagorean theorem."}
{"id": "5128", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5128", "title": "Socrates", "text": "Socrates (469 BC \u2013 399 BC) was one of the greatest Greek philosophers. He did not propose any specific knowledge or policy. He showed how argument, debate, and discussion could help men to understand difficult issues. Most of the issues he dealt with were only political on the surface. Underneath, they were moral questions about how life should be lived. Such is the influence of Socrates that philosophers before him are called the Presocratic philosophers.\nSocrates made enemies, three of whom brought charges against him. Socrates was tried for his life in 399 BC, found guilty, and put to death by drinking hemlock (a herbal poison). The story of his trial and death is the subject of a tract by Plato which is called the \"Apologia\".\nMost of what we know about Socrates comes from the works of Plato, who was his pupil. Socrates lived in the Greek city of Athens. His method of teaching was to have a dialogue with individual students. They would propose some point of view, and Socrates would question them, asking what they meant. He would pretend \"I don't know anything; I'm just trying to understand what it is you are saying\", or words to that effect. This is now called the Socratic method of teaching.\nSocrates is sometimes called the \"father of Western philosophy\". This is because in the discussions he uncovered some of the most basic questions in philosophy, questions which are still discussed today. Some of the people he taught came to be important and successful, like Plato and Alcibiades.\nThe life of Socrates.\nSocrates never wrote anything. All of what we know about Socrates is from what other people wrote about him. Our main source of what we know about Socrates is from the writings of his student, Plato. Some of Plato's dialogues, such as the \"Crito\" and the \"Phaedo\", are loosely based on fact. They are not written records, but artistic re-creation of Socrates in action.\nAnother of Socrates' students, Xenophon also wrote about Socrates. Aristophanes, a person who wrote brilliant satirical comedies, wrote about him in play called \"The Clouds\". Socrates was an easy target for satire. He walked barefoot, and with a swagger. Sometimes he stood in a trance for hours.p8 In \"The Clouds\" Socrates is a crazy person who tries to scam people out of their money. Plato wrote that Socrates taught for free.\nWe do not know if Plato's description of Socrates is accurate or not. That is called the 'Socratic problem'. While a lot of what Plato wrote about Socrates is accepted by historians, some believe that Plato (who saw Socrates as a hero) portrayed Socrates as a greater man than he actually was. Some think that Plato was using the character of Socrates as a tool to express his own opinions rather than to accurately write about Socrates. This is what makes Socrates such a mysterious historical figure. Plato's dialogues are works of art, finely written. The general view is that they are based on reality, but no doubt adjusted for the purpose of writing.\nBiographical details.\nSocrates' father was a sculptor, and his mother was a midwife who helped women give birth to children. He may have been a stonemason like his father, and Plato wrote that he served in the Athenian army as a hoplite (heavy infantry). We know he was influenced by an older philosopher, Archelaus, and that he talked with anyone who had interesting ideas in Athens, but beyond that nothing is known.\nSocrates was about 50 when he married a much younger woman, Xanthippe. They had three children together. Socrates made complaints about his wife, but no one knew if he was telling the truth.\nIt is said that one of Socrates' friends went to ask the oracle at Delphi if there was anyone wiser than Socrates in Athens. The oracle said that there was no wiser person. The oracle was well known for saying things that were ambiguous or unclear. It did not say that Socrates was the wisest, just that there was no person wiser.\nAfter being puzzled by this, Socrates finally decided that his wisdom lay in knowing that he was ignorant. His attempts to show the citizens that some of their ideas were nonsense might help explain his unpopularity. In Plato's works, Socrates says he knows nothing, but can draw out other people's ideas just as his mother helped other women to give birth.\nThe death of Socrates.\nThe accusations.\nIn 399 BC, when Socrates was an old man, three citizens\u2014Meletus, Anytus and Lycon\u2014brought charges against Socrates. A trial was held. In ancient Athens the procedure was quite different from the present day. There was a jury of 500 men drawn from the citizens. Both the accusers and the defendant had to make speeches in person to the jury. Guilt or innocence was by majority vote. There was no preset penalty if the verdict was 'guilty'. Both the accuser and the defendant would make speeches proposing what the penalty should be. Again, a vote was taken.p17\nThere were two charges against him. The general theme was that Socrates was a menace to society. The first charge was of heresy, disbelief in the Gods. It was probably meant to cause prejudice amongst the jurymen. Actually, Socrates observed all the correct procedures of the religion of his times. The charge had been used successfully against another philosopher, Anaxagoras.p17\nThe second charge was that he corrupted the youth with his teachings. What was meant by this? Apparently, this was not about his personal relationship with his pupils. It was about the way he was thought to influence their political views. His circle had included a number of right-wing aristocrats whose ideas were now rejected by most citizens. The brilliant Alcibiades, once a great leader of Athens, was now seen as a traitor.p17\nThe trial.\nCrito, a friend of Socrates, illegally paid the prison guards to allow Socrates to escape. Socrates, however, decided not to escape. When Socrates was put on trial, he gave a long speech to defend himself against the claims made by the Athens government.\nWe have Plato's version of how Socrates defended himself, in the \"Apologia\". It starts:\nThe sentence.\nWhen Socrates was asked to propose his punishment, Socrates said that the government should give him free dinners for the rest of his life for all the good that he did for society. The court held a vote between giving Socrates a fine to pay or putting him to death. The verdict was that Socrates was to be put to death.\nDeath of Socrates.\nSocrates did not fear death. He did not try to avoid death by apologizing for his actions because he thought it was morally right to stand by his principles. Socrates was ordered to drink a cup of hemlock (a poisonous liquid got from the plant). He drank it and died soon after.\nPlato on Socrates' trial and death.\nThere are several dialogues by Plato which deal directly with the trial of Socrates and the period up to his death. They are, in order of the events:\nThe ideas of Socrates.\nSocrates helped people to see what was wrong with their ideas. Sometimes they liked this, sometimes they were not happy or grateful. He said that he, Socrates, was not wise, but that he \"knew that he knew nothing.\" Since other people think they know something, but no one really knows anything, Socrates claimed he knew more than anyone else. He said that people who do bad things do so because they do not know any better.\nPeople think that Socrates was a good man because he did no harm, except he asked questions about everything. However, during his life many people thought he was a bad person, because he asked those questions and because he made young people unhappy about their lives.\nSomeone once wrote that Socrates said that \"A life that was not examined was not worth living\". This means that someone must think about their own life and its purpose. Some people believe that most humans are happier if they do not think too much about their life.\nSocrates also taught that many people can look at something and not truly see it. He asked questions about the meaning of life and goodness. These are still very important questions. Much of philosophy (love of wisdom) is about these things.\nLegacy.\nSocrates is seen by some people as a martyr, since he willingly died to support the idea that knowledge and wisdom are very important to our lives.\nSocrates is known as one of the most important philosophers in history. He is often described as the father of Western philosophy. He did not start Western philosophy, but he had a big influence on it. Before Socrates, philosophy was mainly about mathematics and answering questions about our natural world. Socrates expanded on that and added questions about ethics, politics, and epistemology to philosophy."}
{"id": "5129", "revid": "25400", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5129", "title": "Dante Alighieri", "text": "Dante Alighieri (), known simply as Dante (, , ; c. 1265 \u2013 September 14, 1321), was a major Italian poet of the Late Middle Ages/Early Renaissance. His central work, the \"Commedia\" (\"Divine Comedy\"), is considered the greatest literary work composed in the Italian language and a masterpiece of world literature. In Italian he is known as \"the Supreme Poet\" (\"il Sommo Poeta\"). Dante and the \"Divine Comedy\" have been a source of inspiration for artists for almost seven centuries. Dante, alongside Petrarch and Boccaccio, is known as one of \"the three fountains\", and is often referred to as \"the Father of the Italian language\". The first biography written on him was by his contemporary Giovanni Villani. The most famous section in \"The Divine Comedy\" is the first third of it, the first 34 cantos of the poem, called \"Inferno\", which features Dante's vision of Hell.\nLife.\nDante Alighieri was born in 1265, between May 14 and June 13, under the name \"Durante Alighieri.\" ca. 1450 (Uffizi Gallery). His family was important in Florence, and supported the Papacy.\nThe poet's mother was Bella degli Abati. She died when Dante was seven years old, and Alighiero soon married again, to Lapa di Chiarissimo Cialuffi. Lapa had two children, Dante's brother Francesco and sister \"Tana\" ( short version of \"Gaetana\").\nDante fought in the front of the Guelph troops in the battle of Campaldino (June 11, 1289). After the victory Dante gained an important part in public life.\nWhen Dante was 12, in 1277, he married Gemma di Manetto Donati. Dante had already fallen in love with another girl, Beatrice Portinari that is mentioned same in \"Divine Comedy\", (known also as Bice). Years after Dante's marriage to Gemma he met Beatrice again. He had become interested in writing poems.\nDante had six children with Gemma: Jacopo, Pietro, Giovanni, Gabrielle Alighieri, and Antonia.\nEducation, youth and poetry.\nNot much is known about Dante's education, and it is presumed he studied at home. It is known that he studied Tuscan poetry. His interests brought him to discover the Occitan poetry of the troubadours and the Latin poetry of classical antiquity (with a particular devotion to Virgil).\nAt 18, Dante met Guido Cavalcanti, Lapo Gianni, Cino da Pistoia, and soon after Brunetto Latini; together they became the leaders of \"Dolce Stil Novo\" (\"The Sweet New Style\"). Brunetto later received a special mention in the \"Divine Comedy\" (\"Inferno\", XV, 28), for what he had taught Dante.\nAccording to his work, \"La Vita Nuova\", when he was nine years old he met Beatrice Portinari, daughter of Folco Portinari, with whom he fell in love \"at first sight\", and apparently without even having spoken to her. He saw her frequently after age 18, often exchanging greetings in the street, but he never knew her well\u2014he effectively set the example for the so-called \"courtly love\". Dante gave his imprint to the Stil Novo. Love for Beatrice (as in a different manner Petrarch would show for his Laura) would apparently be the reason for poetry and for living, together with political passions. In many of his poems, she appears such as semi-divine, watching over him constantly.\nWhen Beatrice died in 1290, Dante tried to find \"help\" in Latin literature.\nHe then dedicated himself to philosophical studies at religious schools like the Dominican one in Santa Maria Novella. This \"excessive\" passion for philosophy would later be criticized by the character Beatrice, in \"Purgatorio\", the second book of the \"Divine Comedy\".\nExile and death.\nBoniface quickly dismissed the other delegates and asked Dante alone to remain in Rome. At the same time (November 1, 1301), Charles de Valois entered Florence with Black Guelphs, who in the next six days destroyed much of the city and killed many of their enemies. A new Black Guelph government was installed and Messer Cante dei Gabrielli di Gubbio was appointed \"Podest\u00e0\" of Florence. Dante was put in exile for two years, and ordered to pay a large hill of money.\nDante did not pay the money, in part because he believed he was not guilty, and in part because all his needs in Florence had been stolen by the Black Guelphs. He was condemned to exile for life, and if he returned to Florence without paying the money, he could be burned at the stake.\nIn exile he began searching the foundation for the \"Divine Comedy\", a work in 100 cantos, divided into three books of thirty-three cantos each, with a single introductory canto.\nHe went to Verona as a guest of Bartolomeo I della Scala, then moved to Sarzana in Liguria. Later, he is supposed to have lived in Lucca with Madame Gentucca. Some not sure sources say that he was also in Paris between 1308 and 1310. In 1310, the Holy Roman Emperor Henry VII of Luxembourg, marched 5,000 troops into Italy. Dante saw in him a new Charlemagne who would restore the office of the Holy Roman Emperor for re-take Florence from the Black Guelphs. He wrote to Henry and several Italian princes, demanding that they destroy the Black Guelphs. Mixing religion and private concerns, he invoked the worst anger of God against his city, suggesting several particular targets that coincided with his personal enemies. It was during this time that he wrote the first two books of the \"Divine Comedy\".\nWhen Dante died at Ravenna, the custodians of the body at Ravenna put the bones in a false wall of the monastery. Nevertheless, in 1829, a tomb was built for him in Florence in the basilica of Santa Croce. That tomb has been empty ever since, with Dante's body remaining in Ravenna, far from the land he loved so dearly. The front of his tomb in Florence reads \"Onorate l'altissimo poeta\" \u2013 which roughly translates as \"Honour the most exalted poet\"."}
{"id": "5130", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5130", "title": "Virginia Woolf", "text": "Adeline Virginia Woolf (; ; 25 January 1882 28 March 1941) was an English modernist writer, essayist and feminist.\nChildhood.\nShe was born into a well-known family. Her father, Leslie Stephen, was a Victorian scholar. Her mother, born in India, was a favourite model of the Preraphaelite artists. Her sister, Vanessa Bell, was a painter. She had two brothers; one of them, Thoby, died in 1906.\nHer mother died when she was thirteen and four years later her half-sister Stella died. In these times Virginia started to have her psychological, or mental problems. She had bipolar disorder in the time when few people knew this illness and most thought she was strange.\nAfter the death of her mother, Leslie Stephen was not able to keep good relations in the family. Virginia and her sister Vanessa were sexually abused by their half-brothers George and Gerald. It affected Virginia for the rest of her life.\nIn their childhood, all the Stephens children wrote diaries, but only Virginia kept it for her whole life (and after her death, lots of them were published). It was important for her when she was sexually abused, because there was no one with whom she could talk about it. In the diary, she could write everything.\nWriting life.\nAfter her father's death, Virginia and her brothers and sister moved to Bloomsbury, London and there they became members of the famous group of artists called Bloomsbury Group. Here Virginia met writer Leonard Woolf (1880-1969), whom she was married to from 1912 until her death. Together, they moved to Richmond, where they opened a publishing office called Hogarth House Press, which later published all of Virginia's novels and essays.\nShe was bisexual. When she was a teenager, she fell in love with Violet Dickinson and she wrote her lots of love letters. Violet probably never loved her back. Later, Virginia had a sexual relationship with Vita Sackville-West, a writer and a poet. Their letters, which have been published, show how deeply they were in love.\nHer most famous novels are \"Mrs Dalloway\" and \"To the Lighthouse\". She completed \"Mrs Dalloway\" in 1925. It is about a day in the life of an English woman called Clarissa Dalloway. Clarissa is throwing a party and she spends the entire day preparing. The story can appear stupid, but it is not so important in the book. What's more important are the feelings, the colours, or the mood of the story.\n\"To the Lighthouse\" was published in 1927 for the first time. It is about a family of Ramsays and its friends. These people are altogether spending a summer in Ramsay's house on an island. The youngest of Ramsays children, James, wants to go to the lighthouse, but they can't go there because of bad weather. In the next part of the book, James is ten years older and his father is taking him to the lighthouse, although he doesn't want to go there anymore.\nVirginia Woolf is also an author of these novels: \"Jacob's Room\" (1923), \"Orlando\" (1928) and \"The Waves\" (1931). She was a feminist and she wrote a few essays about women's position in the society, for example \"The Room of One's Own\" and \"Three Guineas\".\nDeath.\nOn 28 March 1941, Woolf drowned herself by filling her overcoat pockets with stones and walking into the River Ouse near her home. Her body was not found until 18 April. Her husband buried her cremated remains beneath an elm tree in the garden of Monk's House, their home in Rodmell, Sussex.\n&lt;br clear=\u201dall\u201d&gt;\nPortrayals in fiction.\nIn 1998, American writer Michael Cunningham wrote a novel in which she appeared, called \"The Hours\" (a winner of the Pulitzer award), which is best known because of the \"same named movie\", in which the role of Virginia was played by actress Nicole Kidman. Kidman won an Oscar for her performance.\nRather better known is \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf\", in which her name is used as a catch-phrase by the lead couple. This was a play, and then a film starring Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton. The film won five Academy Awards."}
{"id": "5131", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5131", "title": "March 28", "text": ""}
{"id": "5132", "revid": "7447735", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5132", "title": "January 25", "text": ""}
{"id": "5133", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5133", "title": "Jane Austen", "text": "Jane Austen (16 December 1775 \u2013 18 July 1817) was an English novelist. She wrote many books of romantic fiction about the gentry. Her works made her one of the most famous and beloved writers in English literature. She is one of the great masters of the English novel.\nAusten's works criticized sentimental novels in the late 18th century, and are part of the change to nineteenth-century realism. She wrote about typical people in everyday life. This gave the English novel its first distinctly modern character. Austen's stories are often comic, but they also show how women depended on marriage for social standing and economic security. Her works are also about moral problems.\nJane Austen was born on 16 December 1775 at Steventon, near Basingstoke. Educated mostly by her father and older brothers, and also by her own reading, she lived with her family at Steventon. They moved to Bath when her father retired in 1801. After he died in 1805, she moved around with her mother. In 1809, they settled in Chawton, near Alton, Hampshire. In May 1817 she moved to Winchester to be near her doctor. She died there on 18 July 1817.\nJane Austen was very modest about her own genius. She once famously described her work as \"the little bit (two Inches wide) of Ivory, on which I work with so fine a brush, as produces little effect after much labor\". When she was a girl she wrote stories. Her works were printed only after much revision. Only four of her novels were printed while she was alive. They were \"Sense and Sensibility\" (1811), \"Pride and Prejudice\" (1813), \"Mansfield Park\" (1814) and \"Emma\" (1815). Two other novels, \"Northanger Abbey\" and \"Persuasion\", were printed in 1817 with a biographical notice by her brother, Henry Austen. \"Persuasion\" was written shortly before her death. She also wrote two earlier works, \"Lady Susan\", and an unfinished novel, \"The Watsons\". She had been working on a new novel, \"Sanditon\", but she died before she could finish it. She is now a well known great writer.\nBiography.\nBiographical facts about Jane Austen are \"famously scarce\" (few). Only a few letters remain (it is estimated that only 160 out of Austen's 3,000 letters survive). Her sister Cassandra (to whom most of the letters were written) burned \"the greater part\" of the ones she kept. The letters she did not destroy she censored. Other letters were destroyed by the heirs of Admiral Francis Austen, Jane's brother. Most of the biographies written about her for 50 years after she died was by her relatives, who often described her as \"good quiet Aunt Jane\". Scholars have not been able to find much information after that.\nFamily.\nAusten's parents, George Austen (1731\u20131805), and his wife, Cassandra (1739\u20131827), were both part of the gentry. Cassandra was a part of the important Leigh family. George Austen, however, was of a lower class of society. He had first met Cassandra at Oxford, while she was meeting her uncle Theophilus. George and Cassandra married on 26 April 1764 at Walcot Church in Bath.\nAusten had a large family. She had six brothers\u2014James (1765\u20131819), George (1766\u20131838), Edward (1767\u20131852), Henry Thomas (1771\u20131850), Francis William (Frank) (1774\u20131865), Charles John (1779\u20131852)\u2014and one sister, Cassandra Elizabeth (1773\u20131845), who died without marrying. Jane deeply loved Cassandra, and they were both best friends. Of her brothers, Austen was most close to Henry, who helped spread and influence her writing. \"Oh, what a Henry!\" she once wrote. George was almost ten years older than Jane. He suffered from fits and was not able to develop normally. His father wrote of him, \"We have this comfort, he cannot be a bad or a wicked child\". He may also have been deaf and mute. Jane knew sign language (she mentioned talking \"with my fingers\" in a letter) and could have communicated with him. Charles and Frank served in the navy. Edward was adopted by his fourth cousin, Thomas Knight. He became \"Edward Knight\" instead of Edward Austen in 1812.\nEarly life and education.\nAusten was born on 16 December 1775 at Steventon rectory. She was christened at home and then, as the Book of Common Prayer directs, brought to church for the baptism to be certified in public on 5 April 1776. A few months after she was born, her mother hired a woman named Elizabeth Littlewood to nurse her. Littlewood took care of Austen for about a year. According to family tradition, Jane and Cassandra were sent to Oxford to be educated by Mrs. Ann Crawley in 1783. They moved with her to Southampton later in the year. Both girls caught typhus and Jane almost died. After that, Austen was educated at home until she went to boarding school with Cassandra early in 1785. She learned some French, spelling, needlework, dancing,music, and probably drama. In the winter of 1786, Jane and Cassandra went back home.\nAusten also learned much by reading books. Her father and brothers helped choose the books she read. George Austen seemed to have let his daughters read the books in his large library freely. He also allowed Austen's experiments in writing, and gave her costly paper and other writing materials.\nJane Austen and her family also enjoyed acting out plays privately. Most of the plays were comedies. This might have been a way for Austen's comedic and satirical talents to develop.\nEarly writings.\nPerhaps from as early as 1787, Austen began writing poems, short stories, and plays for fun. Austen later put together \"fair copies\" of 29 of these early works into three notebooks. They are now called the \"Juvenilia\". It has pieces which were first written down between 1787 and 1793. Jane Austen had arranged her writing during this time into three volumes, namely \"Volume the First\", \"Volume the Second\" and \"Volume the Third\". There is some proof that Austen continued to work on these pieces later in life. Her nephew and niece, James Edward and Anna Austen, may have made further additions to her work in around 1814. In these works were included \"Love and Freindship\" which was completed in 1790 and \"Lesley Castle\" which was completed in 1792. In \"Love and Freindship\", she laughed at popular sentimental novels. She also wrote \"The History of England\", which had 13 watercolour pictures by her sister Cassandra inside it.\nDeath.\nJane Austen started to feel increasingly unwell during 1816, which was the year when her novel \"'Persuasion' \"was published. On 24 May 1817, she moved to Winchester in search for a cure to her illness. She died on 18 July 1817, aged 41. Although there is no conclusive evidence to prove the cause of her death, it seems likely that it was Addison's disease that killed her. She was buried in Winchester Cathedral on 24 July 1817.\nBibliography.\nBiographies\nEssay collections\nMonographs and articles\nOther websites.\nOnline works"}
{"id": "5134", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5134", "title": "Charlotte Bront\u00eb", "text": "Charlotte Bront\u00eb (21 April 1816 \u2013 31 March 1855) was an English novelist and poet. \nShe first published her works, including \"Jane Eyre\", under the pseudonym (false name) of Currer Bell. In 1846, Charlotte encouraged her sisters to print \"Poems by Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell\". They did not sell well. Her first novel, \"The Professor\", was rejected by many publishers. It was not printed until 1857. She is famous for her novel \"Jane Eyre\" (1847), which was very popular when it was printed. \n\"Jane Eyre\" was a strong story of a plain, brave, clever woman struggling with her passions, reasons, and social condition. She later wrote the books \"Shirley\" (1849) and \"Villette\" (1853). She lived longer than her sisters, but she was only 38 when she died in pregnancy.\nLife.\nCharlotte Bront\u00eb was the third child of Patrick Bront\u00eb (formerly \"Patrick Brunty\"), an Irish Anglican clergyman, and his wife, Maria n\u00e9e Branwell. In April 1821, the family moved a few miles to Haworth. Patrick had been appointed Perpetual Curate there. Maria Branwell Bront\u00eb died of cancer on 15 September 1821. She left her five daughters and a son to be looked after by her sister Elizabeth Branwell. \nIn August 1824, Charlotte was sent with three of her sisters to the Clergy Daughters' School at Cowan Bridge in Lancashire. She described it as Lowood School in her novel \"Jane Eyre\". The sisters were Emily, Maria and Elizabeth. The poor conditions of the school permanently affected Charlotte's health according to her. She thought it led to the early deaths of her two elder sisters, Maria (born 1814) and Elizabeth (born 1815). They died of tuberculosis in June 1825 soon after their father took them from the school on 1 June.\nAt home in Haworth Parsonage, Charlotte and the other living children (Branwell, Emily and Anne) began writing about the lives and struggles of the dwellers of their imaginary kingdoms. Charlotte and Branwell wrote Byronic stories about their country \u2014 Angria \u2014 Emily and Anne wrote articles and poems about theirs Gondal.\nCharlotte went to school at Roe Head, Mirfield, from 1831 to 1832. There she met her lifelong friends, Ellen Nussey and Mary Taylor. In 1833 she wrote her novella \"The Green Dwarf\" under the name of Wellesley. Charlotte returned as a teacher from 1835 to 1838. In 1839 she became a governess to various families in Yorkshire, a career she had until 1841. \nIn 1842 she and Emily travelled to Brussels to enroll in a pensionnat (boarding school) run by Constantin Heger (1809 \u2013 1896) and his wife Claire Zo\u00e9 Parent Heger (1814 \u2013 1891). In return for this, Charlotte taught English and Emily taught music. Their time at the pensionnat was cut short when Elizabeth Branwell, their aunt, died in October 1842. Charlotte returned alone to Brussels in January 1843 to be a teacher at the pensionnat. This stay was not happy. She became lonely, homesick and deeply attached to Constantin Heger. She finally returned to Haworth in January 1844 and later used her time at the pensionnat as the inspiration for some of \"The Professor\" and \"Villette\"."}
{"id": "5135", "revid": "572817", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5135", "title": "Emily Bront\u00eb", "text": "Emily Jane Bront\u00eb (30 July 1818 \u2013 19 December 1848) was a British author and poet. She is most famous for her only novel \"Wuthering Heights\" (published in 1847). She wrote under the pen name Ellis Bell. Bront\u00eb had two sisters, Charlotte and Anne, who were also writers. Her brother, Branwell, was a painter. She co-wrote the poetry collection \"Poems by Currer, Ellis and Acton Bell\" (1846), with her sisters. She was born in Thornton, West Riding of Yorkshire, England. She attended Cowan School with her sister Charlotte.\nBront\u00eb died of tuberculosis on 19 December 1848 in Haworth, West Riding of Yorkshire. She was 30."}
{"id": "5136", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5136", "title": "Anne Bront\u00eb", "text": "Anne Bront\u00eb (17 January 1820 \u2013 28 May 1849) was an English writer and poet. She is best known for writing \"Agnes Grey\" (1847) and \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\" (1848).\nAnne was born on 17 January 1820 in Thornton, Yorkshire, England. She was the daughter of Patrick and Marie Bront\u00eb and the youngest of their six children. She was taught at her family's home in Haworth by her aunt Elizabeth Branwell. She worked as a governess in 1839 and then again between 1841 and 1845.\nIn 1846 Anne contributed 21 poems to \"Poems by Currer, Ellis and Acton Bell\". This was a joint work with her sisters, Charlotte and Emily. \"Agnes Grey\" was published in 1847 in three volumes with \"Wuthering Heights\", a book written by her sister Emily. \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\" was published in 1848 and sold well.\nAnne Bront\u00eb died on 28 May 1849 in Scarborough, Yorkshire, England of tuberculosis.\nRelated pages.\nThe sisters of Anne Bront\u00eb:\nThe books of Anne Bront\u00eb:"}
{"id": "5137", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5137", "title": "Charles Dickens", "text": "Charles Dickens (7 February 1812 \u2013 9 June 1870) was one of the great English writers of the 19th century.\nEarly life.\nCharles Dickens was born in Portsmouth, England. His parents were John Dickens (1785-1851), a naval pay clerk, and Elizabeth Barrow (1789\u20131863).\nWhen Dickens was born he had a rare disorder meaning he could not read or write properly like other kids. When Charles was twelve years old, his family moved to Camden, London. He worked in a blacking factory there while his father was in prison for debt. Dickens's hard times in the factory served as a foundation of ideas for many of his novels. Many like \"Oliver Twist\" soon became famous. When his great-grandmother died and transmitted money, Charles' father paid off his debts and was released from prison. Charles did not like working and wished to stop working after his father was released. However, his mother said that the family needed the money so Charles was forced to continue working. Charles then finished his schooling, and got a job as an office boy for an attorney. After finding that job dull, he taught himself shorthand and became a journalist that reported on the government. Dickens was a Unitarian.\nCharles Dickens was once involved in a train crash near Staple ford, Kent.\nWriter.\nHis first book was \"Sketches by Boz\" in 1836, a collection of the short pieces he had been writing for the Monthly Magazine and the Evening Chronicle. This was followed by \"The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club\" in 1837. Both these books became popular as soon as they were printed.\nCharles Dickens died of a stroke on June 9, 1870. He was buried in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.\nBooks.\nCharles Dickens wrote many books, including:"}
{"id": "5138", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5138", "title": "Portsmouth", "text": "Portsmouth is a city in the south of England, in the county of Hampshire. About 280,536 people live there (As Of 2017). It is a port and is the home of the British Royal Navy. It's the second-largest city in the county of Hampshire, behind Southampton. It is one of the most densely populated cities in Europe. Portsmouth is on Portsea Island and is narrowly separated from the mainland by a creek.\nFor centuries the city was one of the world's biggest places of shipbuilding. Some of its most famous ships that people can still see are HMS Victory and the HMS Warrior. People also visit Portsmouth to see the old ship Mary Rose. This was Henry VIII of England's ship, and it was under the water for a long time, from 1545 to 1982. Tourists also go to see Cumberland House, the birthplace of Charles Dickens, a British author (writer).\nCharles Dickens, Rudyard Kipling and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, all British authors, are famous people who lived in Portsmouth.\nIt is home of the Football League Two side Portsmouth F.C. They play at Fratton Park.\nPortsmouth has one university, the University of Portsmouth.\nNorth of the city is Cosham."}
{"id": "5139", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5139", "title": "HMS Victory", "text": "HMS \"Victory\" is the oldest ship still in use. It is in Portsmouth, England with the HMS \"Warrior\" and the remains of the \"Mary Rose\", a ship belonging to Henry VIII of England. \nHer most famous captains are Horatio Nelson, who died on the ship during the Battle of Trafalgar, and Samuel Hood."}
{"id": "5142", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5142", "title": "HMS Warrior (1860)", "text": "HMS \"Warrior\" was the first battleship with a hull made of iron. It was built in response to the French ironclad warship \"Gloire\". It is in Portsmouth, England with the HMS \"Victory\" and the remains of the \"Mary Rose\", a ship belonging to Henry VIII of England."}
{"id": "5143", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5143", "title": "Mary Rose", "text": "The Mary Rose was a ship which belonged to Henry VIII of England. She sank in 1545 in battle with a French fleet.\nIn 1979, the \"Mary Rose\" Trust was formed. In 1982 the \"Mary Rose\" Trust managed to get the \"Mary Rose\" out of the sea. In 1994, they started to preserve her. \nThe remains of the \"Mary Rose\" are currently in Portsmouth, England with the HMS \"Victory\" and HMS \"Warrior\".\nSinking.\nIt is not known the exact reason for the sinking. One of the theories is that she had the gun ports open to fire at the French. She then turned to fire at the other side, but the men on board failed to close the gun ports. Sea water got in the open gun ports, which tipped her over and she sank. \nThe \"Mary Rose\" sank because the wind blew and tipped her over. "}
{"id": "5144", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5144", "title": "Mary Tudor", "text": "The name Mary Tudor can refer to either:"}
{"id": "5147", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5147", "title": "1603", "text": ""}
{"id": "5148", "revid": "6519696", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5148", "title": "April 28", "text": ""}
{"id": "5149", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5149", "title": "Mutiny on the Bounty", "text": "The Mutiny on the \"Bounty has become a famous story, leading to many books, movies, and songs. The HMS \"Bounty was a small, three masted, fully rigged, sailing ship. The \"Bounty\" became famous when the crew (seamen) mutinied (took over) the ship on 28 April 1789. The captain of the \"Bounty\" was named William Bligh.\nThe ship.\nThe ship was built in Hull, England in 1784 and was first called \"Bethia\". In 1787 the ship was rebuilt to carry breadfruit trees. Heat and water were added to the cabins so the trees would survive in cold weather. The British government was hoping the breadfruit trees growing wild in Tahiti could be grown in Jamaica. This would provide cheap food for the slaves working on the sugar farms. The ship was very small - 90 feet 10\u00a0inches (27.7 metres) long and 24 feet 4\u00a0inches (7.4 metres) wide. The tallest mast was 53 feet (16.1 metres) high.\nThe \"Bounty\" was captained by Lieutenant William Bligh and he took command on 16 August 1787. On 23 December, 1787, \"Bounty\" set off on the long trip to Tahiti. On the journey, William Bligh tried to go around Cape Horn. He tried for over a month but bad weather and winds stopped the ship. The \"Bounty\" was turned around and went the longer way around the Cape of Good Hope.\nTahiti.\nThe \"Bounty\" reached Tahiti on 25 October 1788. She had been at sea for ten months. The crew stayed for five months and lived on the island. They collected 1015 breadfruit plants. The crew were very happy living in Tahiti and Fletcher Christian fell in love with a Tahitian girl named Maimiti. They did not want to have another long journey and go back to England.\nThe \"Bounty\" left Tahiti on 4 April 1789, on the way to Jamaica. On 28 April, near the Friendly Islands, Fletcher Christian led the mutiny (take over). Bligh and 18 sailors were left at sea in a small boat, while Christian and the \"Bounty\" went back to Tahiti. Christian and a small group of sailors, 11 Tahitian women, and 6 Tahitian men then went to the remote Pitcairn Island. After they arrived they took everything they could from the ship. A sailor called Matthew Quintal, burned and destroyed the \"Bounty\" on 23 January 1790.\nPitcairn Island.\nPitcairn Island is a remote island in the Pacific Ocean. The Polynesians knew about the island and people had once lived there. There was nobody living on Pitcairn when it was discovered by an English sailor, Philip Carteret on 2 July 1767. He made a mistake and marked it on the map 200 miles from its real location. The people from the \"Bounty\" had the remote island to themselves. There was a lot of fighting between the new settlers. Fletcher Christian, 4 other mutineers and all 6 of the Tahitian men were killed. One of the 4 surviving mutineers fell off a cliff while drunk. Matthew Quintal was killed by the remaining 2 mutineers after he attacked them. When the American seal-hunting ship \"Topaz\" visited the island in 1808 they found only 1 mutineer, John Adams, still alive along with 9 Tahitian women. In 1856, the British government moved all the island people to Norfolk Island. Most stayed on Norfolk, but about 22 people found their way back and their descendants still live on Pitcairn. Norfolk has about 1000 \"Bounty\" descendants, which is about half its population.\nAfterwards.\nLieutenant William Bligh was able to sail the small boat 6500 km back to Batavia. He returned to England and reported the mutiny to the Admiralty on 15 March 1790. On 7 November 1790, HMS \"Pandora\" was sent to Tahiti look for the \"Bounty\" and to bring back the mutineers for punishment. The \"Pandora\" was able to capture the mutineers left on Tahiti, but could find no sign of the group that was hiding on Pitcairn. The \"Pandora\" was wrecked on the way back to England.\nThe following list tells what happened to the crew of the \"Bounty\".\nTwo died before the mutiny:\nFrom the 19 left in the small boat, only 12 got back safely to England\nOne sailor was killed on the trip to Timor:\nOne sailor died from disease when they reached Timor:\nThree sailors died from disease not long after getting to Batavia:\nTwo sailors died on their way home from Batavia to England:\nSeven sailors were forced to stay on the \"Bounty\" after the mutiny. There was not room in the small boat. They were all taken prisoner in Tahiti by the \"Pandora\" to be taken back to England to be charged:\nTwo of the mutineers who stayed on Tahiti died before the \"Pandora\" arrived:\nThree mutineers who were captured by the \"Pandora\", drowned in the wreck:\nFour mutineers survived the wreck and were taken to England for trial:\nOnly two of the mutineers who went to Pitcairn died peacefully:"}
{"id": "5150", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5150", "title": "1787", "text": ""}
{"id": "5151", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5151", "title": "August 16", "text": ""}
{"id": "5152", "revid": "7444146", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5152", "title": "December 23", "text": ""}
{"id": "5153", "revid": "183741", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5153", "title": "1788", "text": ""}
{"id": "5154", "revid": "7444144", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5154", "title": "October 25", "text": ""}
{"id": "5155", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5155", "title": "1789", "text": ""}
{"id": "5156", "revid": "314522", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5156", "title": "April 4", "text": ""}
{"id": "5157", "revid": "937699", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5157", "title": "May 28", "text": ""}
{"id": "5158", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5158", "title": "Political virtues", "text": "The political virtues were listed by Bernard Crick \"In Defense of Politics\", 1982. They included but were not limited to: \ntake one step, then see its results before taking another\nmaking friends with people you have argued with\ngiving up some things you want to get those things that are most important to you\npeople want to have a number of choices that are different from each other\nmeet the needs of changing times\nnever be boring\nHe sees these virtues as a way of avoiding ideology or \"absolute-sounding ethic\". More virtues will lead to less conflict. None of them can be forced on anyone.\nSome other virtues have also been suggested:\nhumour,\nempathy,\ninitiative\nand compassion. \"Being brief\" or \"being positive\" are sometimes claimed also to be virtues, but just as many people think they are bad things that only help avoid truth or serious problems."}
{"id": "5159", "revid": "7696407", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5159", "title": "Lady Jane Grey", "text": "Lady Jane Grey (1537-1554), also known as 'The Nine Days Queen', was born in London, or at her family home of Bradgate Park, Leicestershire, England.\nJane was an English noblewoman, who occupied the English throne from 10 July until 19 July 1553 and was executed by decapitation, a usual method for persons of royal blood, for high treason.\nA great-granddaughter of Henry VII by his younger daughter Mary, Jane was a first-cousin-once-removed of Edward VI.\nIn May 1553, Jane married Lord Guildford Dudley, a younger son of Edward's chief minister, John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland. When the 15-year-old King lay dying in June 1553, he nominated Jane as successor to the Crown in his will, thus subverting the claims of his half-sisters Mary and Elizabeth.\nDuring her short reign, Jane lived in the Tower of London. She became a prisoner there, as the Privy Council decided to change sides and proclaim Mary as queen, on 19 July 1553. Wyatt's rebellion in January and February 1554 against Queen Mary's plans of a Spanish match was the direct cause of Jane's and her husband's execution.\nFamily.\nShe was the daughter of Henry Grey, Duke of Suffolk, and Lady Frances Brandon (16 July 1517 \u2013 20 November 1559), the daughter of Henry VIII's sister, Mary. She was born on 12 October 1537 and she was probably named after Jane Seymour (c. 1508 or 1509 \u2013 24 October 1537). Jane had two younger sisters, Catherine (b. 1540) and Mary (b. 1545).\nEarly life.\nJane's parents were very strict even by the standards of the day. If she made mistakes in her studies or had any other normal troubles, her mother would slap her or beat her. She found she loved her nurse, but otherwise lived a sad childhood.\nShe told a visiting scholar Roger Ascham: \n\"For when I am in the presence of either Father or Mother, whether I speak, keep silence, sit, stand or go, eat, drink, be merry or sad, be sewing, playing, dancing, or doing anything else, I must do it as it were in such weight, measure and number, even so perfectly as God made the world; or else I am so sharply taunted, so cruelly threatened, yes presently sometimes with pinches, nips and bobs and other ways ... that I think myself in hell\".\nWhen Jane was nine, she was sent to the royal court to learn etiquette and manners with Henry VIII's sixth wife and eventual widow, Catherine Parr. Jane liked Catherine a great deal and found love with her, which she had not got from her parents. It was clear that Catherine was very fond of Jane in return.\nJane also found friendship with her cousin and future king Edward VI. They often studied together.\nJane was well educated as a child and learned to read in Latin, Greek, French and Italian, as well as English. Later in her life, she also learned Hebrew.\nParents' political ambitions.\nJane's parents, especially her mother, wanted to gain more political influence. For that reason, they wanted to marry her to someone important. Jane had two sisters, Catherine, born in 1540, and Mary, born in 1545. After her sisters were born, her parents tried to marry Jane to her cousin Edward VI. They went to Catherine Parr's new husband, Thomas Seymour, to try to prepare this royal marriage. It is likely that King Edward loved Jane. However, he decided to arrange a marriage with a foreign princess instead.\nIn 1548, Jane was sent to Chelsea to be with Catherine Parr and Thomas Seymour. Catherine Parr became pregnant that same year and the family moved to Sudeley Castle in June, taking Jane with them. Tragedy struck when Catherine Parr died while having the baby in August of that year and Jane served as chief mourner in her funeral.\nJane was dealt another blow in 1549 when Thomas Seymour was arrested on charges of treason. She was sent back to her angered parents. They knew that their hopes of her marriage to the king were ruined; they punished her cruelly for this, even though it was not her fault.\nYouth.\nIn 1551 Jane's mother's two half-brothers died of the \"sweating sickness\", a contagious disease that caused a series of epidemics, 1485 to 1551. Since Frances's father was dead, she became Duchess of Suffolk. Jane's father became Duke of Suffolk. In the same year John Dudley was made the Duke of Northumberland and the chief councillor to Edward VI.\nJohn Dudley's plot.\nIn April 1552 Edward became sick with the measles and caught tuberculosis as well. By next year, Edward was so ill that he was weak and spitting up blood or something that was greenish-yellow. It was clear that he was going to die soon.\nDudley knew that if either of Edward's half-sisters, Mary or Elizabeth, became queen, he would not be powerful anymore. Dudley plotted with Jane's equally ambitious parents and planned that Jane became his ward, and also that she marry his son, Guildford Dudley. Jane's mother decided to give up her claim to be queen for Jane. This did not mean that Frances was any less greedy, however. This meant that Jane would become Frances and Dudley's puppet and do what they wanted. Now Jane would be the next in line to the throne if the rights of the princesses Mary and Elizabeth were ignored.\nMarriage.\nWhen Jane's mother and father told her that Jane was going to get married, Jane refused. She said that Guildford was ugly, stupid, and rude. She also hated John Dudley. When Jane refused, Frances and Henry swore at Jane and slapped her. This did not work, so Frances gave Jane a brutal whipping. Finally, Jane agreed.\nThe wedding between Jane and Guildford happened on 25 May 1553. This became a triple marriage because Jane's sister, Katherine, was married at this time to Lord Herbert, and Guildford's sister, Katherine, was also married to Lord Hastings.\nAccession.\nOn 6 July 1553, King Edward VI died. Dudley's plan to make Jane queen was starting to take place. Edward's death was kept secret for a few days until Jane could be proclaimed queen.\nJane was told by her parents and John Dudley that she was queen. She became sick with fright and fainted. She did not want to take the crown.\n\"The crown is not my right. It pleaseth me not. The Lady Mary is the rightful heir,\" Jane said. Her parents swore at her and John Dudley told her that she \"doth wrong to herself and her house\". Under pressure, Jane finally relented. Lady Jane said she never forgave herself for doing this.\nMeanwhile, news was spreading the Jane had been proclaimed the new queen. Although the people liked Jane, they loved Mary and Elizabeth more. They also did not like John Dudley. In East Anglia, Mary was gaining support and planning to march into London. Dudley tried to enforce a counter-attack but to no avail. On 19 July Mary became queen. Jane was queen for nine days.\nImprisonment.\nJane returned all the crown jewels and clothes. She was then brought into the Tower of London. There, she was kept in a cell for the next few months. However, she was allowed to walk in the garden. She wrote many letters and read many books while at the Tower of London. She wrote a letter to Queen Mary saying that she never wanted the crown. \nQueen Mary believed Jane and refused to execute her cousin. Many people pressured Mary, but she was stubborn. She still ordered that a trial be held for traditional purposes. Jane was found guilty but the Queen pardoned her.\nHowever, the next year, 1554, a group of rebels under Thomas Wyatt, including Jane's father Henry Grey, led a rebellion against Queen Mary because she was planning to marry prince Phillip II of Spain. It was quickly put down. Although Jane had nothing to do with it and Mary did not want to kill her cousin, her advisors told her that Phillip would only come if Jane was killed. So, with a heavy heart (sadly), Queen Mary signed the death warrant. Jane was going to be beheaded.\nEffects.\nWhen Jane was told that her head was going to be cut off, she was very scared. Nonetheless, she was happy that her \"sad and woeful days\" of life were finally coming to an end.\nMeanwhile, Mary still did not want to kill her cousin. So, she sent a Catholic priest Dr. Feckenham to try to convert Jane to Catholicism. That way, Jane would not be a threat. Jane was a firm Protestant, and refused to become a Catholic. Jane's execution was postponed from 9 February to 12 February, to try and make her a Catholic. The night before the execution, Jane wrote many letters to her family and prepared her neck for the block. The next morning, her hair was tied back, and she watched Guildford go very unwillingly to the block. Then it was her turn.\nExecution.\nOn 12 February 1554, at the Tower of London, Jane was sent to the scaffold. She calmly climbed the scaffold and said a speech. She said the Psalm 51, a prayer for divine mercy, in \"the most devout manner\". She then knelt by the block and tied a piece of cloth around her eyes.\nWhen the executioner told her to put her head on the block, she reached out but could not find the block since she was very scared. She cried for help until someone grabbed her hands and helped her find the block. Jane then put her neck above the block and slowly lowered it onto the block, pressed her neck against the wood and fit her chin in the hold. Then she brought her arms around her. Before she was executed, she cried out \"Lord, into thy hands, I commend my spirit!\"\nSome say her last words were the name of her much loved husband, Lord Guildford.\nBeheading.\nThe crowd watched as the executioner raised the axe high in the air. Jane was shivering badly but her neck stayed perfectly still. Then, the executioner quickly swung the axe down perfectly at the middle of Jane's neck, which was severed in a single stroke. Jane's severed head fell to the straw in front of the block while huge amounts of blood splattered across the scaffold. The executioner then grabbed Jane's head by her red hair and lifted it up to show the crowd. He shouted \"So perish all the Queen's enemies! Behold the head of a traitor!\"\nBut some sources suggest the fact that it took three shots to remove Lady Jane's head.\nBurial.\nAfter the crowd left, the blood was removed, and Jane's body was brought to the church St. Peter ad Vincula. Since the church had just become Catholic and Jane was a Protestant, they had to get permission from Queen Mary to bury her. It was four hours until her maids were allowed to prepare her body for burial. Jane's body was buried between former Queens Anne Boleyn and Catherine Howard. It is unknown what happened to her severed head."}
{"id": "5160", "revid": "1155480", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5160", "title": "Tower of London", "text": "The Tower of London is an ancient Norman stone fortress in London, England. It stands on the bank of the River Thames, in the oldest part of the city.\nIt is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nHistory.\nThe fortress was built by William the Conqueror, King William I, starting in 1078. The moat was built by Richard I, using water diverted from the River Thames.\nThe Tower had many uses. Its main function was to protect Norman rule in the years after the conquest. It was a prison, and a place of execution. Today, the Crown Jewels are kept there. This is the collection of jewels owned by the British state, and sometimes worn by the monarch. There is also a museum of armour.\nOnly the most important people were executed (by axe) inside the Tower of London. Among the most famous were:\n&lt;br&gt;\nThe Tower of London has a collection of ravens, large black birds of the Crow family. They are taken care of by the staff who work there. The ravens' wing feathers are kept short so they cannot fly away. This is because a legend (story) says that if the ravens leave the Tower, the Tower and the Kingdom will fall.\nThe closest Underground station to the Tower of London is Tower Hill.\nEscape Attempts.\nRanulf Flambard: 1100, successfully escaped. Gruffudd ap Llywelyn ap Iorwerth: 1244, fell from the tower and died during escape attempt."}
{"id": "5161", "revid": "847394", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5161", "title": "Anne Boleyn", "text": "Anne Boleyn (1501 or 1507 \u2013 19 May 1536) was the second wife of King Henry VIII of England and queen consort from 1533 until 1536. She was the mother of Elizabeth I of England. Anne has been called \"the most influential and important queen consort England has ever had.\" It was because of Anne Boleyn that Henry VIII divorced Catherine of Aragon, and became independent from the Roman Catholic Church. After she was falsely accused of adultery, incest and high treason, she was executed.\nPersonality and appearance.\nThere were many different opinions of Anne Boleyn's beauty. The Venetian diarist Marino Sanuto described Anne as \"not one of the handsomest women in the world; she is of middling stature, swarthy complexion, long neck, wide mouth, bosom not much raised ... eyes, which are black and beautiful\". Simon Gryn\u00e9e wrote to Martin Bucer in September 1531 that Anne was \"young, good-looking, of a rather dark complexion\". Lancelot de Carles called her \"beautiful\" with a good figure. A Venetian in Paris in 1528 also said that she was beautiful. The most well-known description of Anne was written by the Catholic Nicholas Sanders in 1586. He wrote it several years after Anne died. Even though this is the most famous, it is also probably the least correct description. \"Anne Boleyn,\" he said, \"was rather tall ... with black hair, and an oval face of a sallow complexion, as if troubled with jaundice. She had a projecting tooth under the upper lip, and on her right hand six fingers (which historians now say is not true). There was a large wen under her chin, and therefore to hide its ugliness she wore a high dress covering her throat ... She was handsome to look at, with a pretty mouth.\" Sanders said that it was because of Anne that Henry went away from the Catholic Church. Sanders' words about Anne made what Eric Ives called the \"monster legend\" of Anne Boleyn. Anne was also a good dancer. William Forrest, who wrote a modern poem about Catherine of Aragon, praised Anne's dancing. He said she had \"passing excellent\" skill as a dancer. \"Here\", he wrote, \"was [a] fresh young damsel, that could trip and go.\"\nEarly life.\nLittle is known for certain about Anne's early life, beginning with the date and location of her birth. She was born in either 1501 or 1507, as one source says she was 20 upon her return from France in 1521, and another that she was not yet 29 at the time of her death in 1536. The location was either Blickling Hall in Norfolk or Hever Castle in Kent. She was the daughter of Sir Thomas Boleyn, a courtier and later a diplomat, and his wife Lady Elizabeth Howard, daughter of the Duke of Norfolk. She had two siblings; a sister Mary and a brother George.\nAnne's early education was the same for girls of her class. Her academic education was limited to arithmetic, her family genealogy, grammar, history, reading, and writing. She had been given a strong upbringing in religion and the Scriptures as the Boleyns were a family of firm religious beliefs. Anne developed domestic skills such as dancing, embroidery, good manners and morals, household management, music, needlework, and singing and excelled in playing several musical instruments including the block flute, the harp, the lute, and the virginals. She learned to play games such as, cards, chess, and dice and outdoor pursuits such as archery, falconry, horseback riding, and hunting. Anne was also taught to have obedience to the men in her life was which first to her father and then to her husband once she was married.\nIn 1513, she was sent to Margaret of Austria's royal court in the Netherlands to complete her education. Anne learned to speak French and studied art, culture, dance, literature, music, and poetry while she was there. The following year, she was transferred to the French court on the occasion of the marriage of Princess Mary Tudor, younger sister of King Henry VIII, to the French King Louis XII. Anne remained in France after the death of Louis XII and served as a lady-in-waiting to Queen Claude upon the accession of Francis I. In Queen Claude's household, Anne completed her study of French and developed a thorough knowledge of French culture and etiquette. As well as English, French, and some Italian, Anne demonstrated a working knowledge of Latin. She also developed an interest in fashion and religious philosophy that called for reform of the Church. Anne stayed in France until late winter 1521.\nReturn to England.\nAnne was called back to England to marry a distant cousin James Butler, in the hope to settle an inheritance dispute over the Earldom of Ormond. However, when the plan failed, Thomas Boleyn found a place for his daughter at the English court, as lady-in-waiting to Queen Katherine. There, Anne fell in love with Sir Henry Percy, who was the eldest son of the Earl of Northumberland, and they became secretly engaged to be married much to the displeasure of their respective families. Cardinal Wolsey ordered them to be separated. Anne was sent home to Hever Castle and Henry Percy was forced to marry Lady Mary Talbot, the daughter of Edward Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. Anne blamed Cardinal Wolsey for her lost love and was determined to have her revenge on him, because he had called her a \"foolish girl\".\nRoyal love affair.\nAnne came back to the royal court and soon King Henry fell passionately in love with her. He wanted her to become his mistress, however she categorically refused, which made Henry's desire for her even greater.\nKing Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon had produced only one daughter, Princess Mary, not thought suitable to rule the country after his death. Henry needed a son to succeed him and to secure the Tudor dynasty, but Catherine was now too old to have children. Henry then came to see Anne as the answer to the problem of the succession, and decided to divorce Catherine, so that he could marry Anne instead and have male heirs.\nHe said that the marriage was not valid because Catherine had been married to his older brother Arthur, Prince of Wales before she had married Henry. Arthur had died a few months after the marriage at the age of fifteen, and a special dispensation from the Pope on the ground the marriage had never been consummated was issued so Catherine could marry Henry and the alliance between Spain and England would be kept. King Henry now thought that their marriage should not have been allowed in the first place and that they had been punished by not having any sons. He quoted a verse from the Bible that said \"a man may not marry his brother's wife\". He said he was doing what he thought was right, even though he still loved Catherine, but his conscience would not allow him to continue living in sin with her. The plans for the divorce caused a lot of gossip at court and abroad and became known as the \"King's Great Matter\".\nA special court was held, with Wolsey leading it, to decide if the divorce should be allowed. An official from the Pope in Rome was brought over and a trial was held. The official stated that he could not decide what to do. He wanted the Pope to decide instead. The Pope was fearful to offend Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, nephew of Catherine, and what would happen if he allowed the divorce. He did not make a decision. In the meantime, Anne and King Henry were becoming more and more impatient.\nMarriage.\nAfter becoming Marquess of Pembroke in her own right, Anne felt secure enough and finally gave in to Henry in late 1532 and soon became pregnant. In order to have a legitimate heir to the throne, this meant that Anne and Henry needed to legalize their union quickly and therefore were secretly married on January 25, 1533, even though the divorce had not come through.\nNo longer hoping for the Pope to grant him a divorce, Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon was declared illegal in the following May by the newly appointed Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Cranmer, former chaplain of the Boleyns. Catherine was sent away from court with the title of Dowager Princess of Wales as if she had never been married to Henry.\nNow recognized as Henry's legal wife, Anne was formally crowned Queen of England on June 1, 1533. All that was needed now was the birth of a son and her triumph would be complete.\nAnne gave birth to a daughter, the future Elizabeth I of England, on September 7, 1533. King Henry was very disappointed, after all his troubles, the problem of the succession was still not resolved. However, Anne soon became pregnant again but that ended in a miscarriage in the summer of 1534. Henry started to worry that Anne could not give him a healthy male child. Feeling the king's displeasure, Anne became more and more insecure and ever more difficult and Henry began tiring of her. The situation only deteriorated when the king began to pay special attention to a lady of the court named Jane Seymour.\nWhen, on January 29, 1536, Anne gave birth to a stillborn male child, Henry felt betrayed and completely turned against her, accusing her of having bewitched him.\nDownfall and execution.\nHenry's new secretary, Thomas Cromwell, looked for a way to get rid of Anne so that Henry could marry again to his mistress Jane Seymour. He found people who said that Anne had been the lover of other men while she was married to King Henry. She was put on trial and found guilty of treason, adultery and incest, although she was probably innocent. The men who were accused of being her lovers were Sir Francis Weston, her musician Mark Smeaton, Sir Henry Norris, William Brereton, and her brother Viscount Rochford George Boleyn. All of them were condemned and executed.\nAnne was executed on 19 May 1536 in the Tower of London, London, England. She was buried in the Chapel Royal of Saint Peter ad Vincula, within the Tower of London."}
{"id": "5163", "revid": "1091397", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5163", "title": "Mona Lisa", "text": "Mona Lisa (also known as La Gioconda or La Joconde) is a 16th-century portrait painted in oil by Leonardo da Vinci during the Renaissance in Florence, Italy. Many people think Mona Lisa's smile is mysterious. It is so often studied, recognized, and copied that it is the most famous painting . The Louvre says that about 80 percent of its visitors come to see the painting of Mona Lisa. According to art experts, the Mona Lisa is the best known, most visited, and overall most famous work of art in the entire world. \nAcquired by King Francis I of France, the Mona Lisa is now the property of France. It is on permanent display in Paris at the Louvre museum. Millions of visitors come to Paris every year to see the enigmatic smile on Mona Lisa's lips.Giorgio Vasari, who was Leonardo's first biographer (a person who writes about the life of another person), thought the painting was of a person named Lisa Gherardini. Speculation over the painting's model was solved in 2008 by Dr Armin Schlechter, a manuscript expert. Notes discovered in Heidelberg University Library which were written by Agostino Vespucci, a Florentine city official, reinforced Vasari's earlier identification of the model. Lisa was the wife of Francesco del Giocondo a rich silk merchant, who lived in Florence.\nAlthough the sitter has traditionally been identified as Lisa del Giocondo, a lack of definitive evidence has long fueled alternative theories, including Leonardo's mother Caterina in a distant memory and glorified as the Virgin Mary as the painting\u2019s subject, and the possibility that Leonardo used his own likeness.\nLeonardo began painting the \"Mona Lisa\" in 1503 or 1504 in Florence, Italy. According to Da Vinci's contemporary, Giorgio Vasari, \"...after he had lingered over it four years, left it unfinished...\".\nThe painting was brought to France by Leonardo in 1516 and it was bought by Francis I of France.\nThe \"Mona Lisa\" used to hang in the Chateau Fontainebleau and was then moved to the Palace of Versailles. After the French Revolution, Napoleon I of France had it hanging in his bedroom in the Tuileries Palace, but it was later moved to the Louvre where it is still hanging today.\nStolen.\nOn August 21, 1911, the \"Mona Lisa\" was stolen. The Louvre museum thought it was being photographed, but when they checked, it was not there. The Louvre closed for one week to help look for it.\nPeople thought Guillaume Apollinaire, a French poet, stole it. He was put into jail, and tried to make people think his friend Pablo Picasso did it, and he was questioned. It was not either of them, though.\nIt was lost for two years, and everybody thought it would be lost forever. A worker at the Louvre, named Vincenzo Peruggia, had actually stolen it. He had hidden it in his coat and walked out with it after the museum had closed. He wanted the painting to go back to Italy and be shown in an Italian museum. After hiding it in his apartment for two years, he grew impatient and tried to sell it to a gallery in Florence, but was caught. It was shown all over Italy before going back to the Louvre. People thought Vincenzo was a hero who loved Italy, so he only spent a few months in jail."}
{"id": "5164", "revid": "7444160", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5164", "title": "December 14", "text": ""}
{"id": "5165", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5165", "title": "1542", "text": ""}
{"id": "5166", "revid": "7857092", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5166", "title": "February 13", "text": ""}
{"id": "5167", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5167", "title": "January 31", "text": ""}
{"id": "5168", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5168", "title": "1981", "text": "1981 (MCMLXXXI) was ."}
{"id": "5169", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5169", "title": "Britney Spears", "text": "Britney Jean Spears (born December 2, 1981) is an American recording artist, singer-songwriter, dancer, entertainer and actress. She has recorded several albums and has received several entertainment industry awards.\nEarly life.\nBritney Jean Spears was born on December 2, 1981. Her parents are Lynne Irene (n\u00e9e Bridges) and James Parnell Spears. She grew up in Kentwood, Louisiana. One of Spears's maternal great-great-grandfathers was Maltese. Her siblings are Bryan James and Jamie Lynn. She was the middle of three children.\nShe prepared early for a career in entertainment. She took music and dance lessons. She often performed for family and friends.\nPersonal life.\nOn January 3, 2004, Spears married her childhood friend Jason Allen Alexander in Las Vegas, Nevada. The marriage was annulled 55 hours later. On September 18, 2004, Spears married Kevin Federline. They had a son on September 14, 2005 named Sean Preston Spears Federline. On September 12, 2006, Britney gave birth to their second son, Jayden James Spears Federline.\nIn November 2006, Spears filed for divorce from Federline. In September 2007, Spears lost some custody of her two children, Sean Preston and Jayden James, to her ex-husband, Federline. At the beginning of January 2008, Spears lost full custody of her children after a mental breakdown. In February 2008, her father took control of her estate. Spears currently has 50/50 custody of her two sons.\nHer father Jamie has been one of her conservators since 2008. Fans have participated in a movement known as #FreeBritney to raise awareness about Spears' conservatorship arrangement. In 2021, Spears spoke in a courtroom hearing, revealing that she felt controlled by the \"abusive\" arrangement, in ways such as having an IUD to prevent pregnancy, despite wanting to have another child. She was also sent to a rehab center and was prescribed lithium. Spears also claimed that she did not know she could ask for this conservatorship to be canceled. In July, Spears hired a new lawyer, who filed a petition for Jamie to be removed as a conservator. August of that year, it was revealed that Jamie Spears showed interest in stepping down as one of Britney's conservators.\nSpears stated in 2012 that she has attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.\nProfessional life.\nSpears appeared on the 1993\u20131994 season of the children's television series, \"The All New Mickey Mouse Club\". In 1997, she signed with Jive Records. Her first and second studio albums \"...Baby One More Time\" (1999, the best-selling album by a teenage solo artist) and \"Oops!... I Did It Again\" (2000) became great successes. Their title tracks broke sales records around the world.\nIn 2001, Spears released her third album \"Britney\" and starred in the profitmaking but critically panned movie, \"Crossroads\". She developed a more sexualized image, dancing in little clothing with an albino python at the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards. She took creative control of her fourth album \"In the Zone\" (2003). The song \"Toxic\" was a huge success. In 2003, she shared a kiss with Madonna at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards that raised eyebrows in the entertainment industry and fan magazines.\nSpears' fifth album \"Blackout\" was released in 2007.\nOn September 17, 2013 \"Work Bitch\" was released as the first single from Spears' eighth album \"Britney Jean\".\nIn November 2017, her first watercolor painting sold for $10,000 in Las Vegas.\nAwards.\nSpears has one Grammy, three MTV Video Music Awards, and her own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She has had five #1 songs: \"...Baby One More Time\", \"Womanizer\", \"3\", \"Hold It Against Me\" and \"S&amp;M (remix)\"\nAlbums.\nSpears has made nine studio albums:"}
{"id": "5171", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5171", "title": "The Matrix", "text": "The Matrix is a science fiction action movie that was made in 1999. It was written and directed by the Wachowski Sisters. The main actors in the movie are Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, and Hugo Weaving. \"The Matrix\" was followed by two sequels: \"The Matrix Reloaded\" and \"The Matrix Revolutions\".\nStory.\nThe main character of the movie is Thomas A. Anderson (played by Keanu Reeves), who is a computer programmer at MetaCortex, a big software company, but he is also an underground hacker. Thomas meets Trinity (played by Carrie-Anne Moss), who then introduces him to Morpheus (played by Laurence Fishburne), who gives him a choice between taking a blue pill or a red pill. If he took the blue pill, he would wake up at his bed and wouldn't be bothered anymore, but if he took the red pill, Morpheus would show him the truth about the Matrix. Thomas takes the red pill. Then Morpheus tells Thomas he is actually Neo, or \"the one\". He explains to Neo that the Matrix is a computer program made by robots to simulate a world which humans think is real. He then explains to Neo that, because he is \"the one\" he is able to modify the Matrix however he wants. Morpheus then helps Neo to get out of the Matrix. At the beginning, Neo is skeptical about his power, but after training, he is able to show his real power. Neo, Trinity, Morpheus and the rest of the rebels then go on a journey to free humans from the Matrix.\nSymbolism.\nThere is a lot of symbolism in \"The Matrix\". Common sources are Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism (the concept of maya), the ancient philosopher Plato and \"Plato's Cave\", modern philosophers such as Ren\u00e9 Descartes, and modern authors such as William Gibson.\nDescartes says that maybe humans are brains in jars. A monster is maybe tricking humans. The monster makes humans believe that they are in the real world, but actually humans are simply brains. Humans cannot know what is real.\nPhilosophy.\nThere are also references to \"Simulacra and Simulation\", a very modern philosophy book by Jean Baudrillard. Baudrillard says that in the modern world, copies of copies are made. \"The Real\" is gone because people do not know what the first things were. For example, a modern person who eats a chicken did not kill the chicken. That person does not know what a real chicken is. The chicken meat is false because the person did not kill the chicken. The person's reality is the chicken meat.\nSymbols in the music of \"The Matrix\".\n&lt;poem&gt;\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nMusic.\nDon Davis made the score (orchestra part with violins and flutes).\nThe Matrix's soundtrack (band music for a movie) includes music from bands such as Rammstein, Rob Dougan, Rage Against the Machine, Propellerheads, Massive Attack, The Prodigy, Rob Zombie, and Marilyn Manson.\nOther meanings.\nThe word \"matrix\" sometimes means \"origin\" or \"beginnings\". In very old English, \"matrix\" means \"womb\". A matrix is also a part of mathematics.\nEffect of the movie.\nA new religion called Matrixism or The path of the One is based on the movie \"The Matrix\". The religion began in 2004 with 300 members. Now there are about 16,000 members of Matrixism.\nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "5174", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5174", "title": "Portuguese (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "5176", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5176", "title": "September 11 attacks", "text": "The September 11 attacks (also called 9/11) were four terrorist attacks against the United States of America. They all happened on the morning of Tuesday, September 11, 2001. The attacks killed almost 3,000 people, including the 19 attackers, making it the deadliest terrorist attack in history. They caused more than $10 billion in damage to infrastructure.&lt;ref name=\"PEARL9/11\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; They were carried out by the Islamic terrorist group al-Qaeda. They used passenger airplanes to destroy famous buildings by flying the planes into them. There were two attacks in New York City and one in Arlington, Virginia. The fourth attack did not work and the plane crashed in a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania.\nThe buildings attacked were the World Trade Center's twin towers in New York City, and the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia. The fourth plane crashed in an empty field in Pennsylvania before it could reach its target in Washington, D.C. That target was either the White House or the United States Capitol. After the event, the United States government said the people who had done the attacks were close to the terrorist group al-Qaeda.\nAirplanes involved.\nThe first of the four planes to take off was American Airlines Flight 11, a Boeing 767-200ER. It was long and wide. It had two aisles. The plane made daily flights between Boston and Los Angeles. When it took off at 7:59\u00a0a.m. on the morning of the eleventh, it carried only 81 passengers in its 158 seats. Forty-seven minutes later, it crashed into the North Tower at . It was carrying 9,717 gallons of jet fuel, 14,000 fewer than it was able to carry.\nUnited Airlines Flight 175, also a Boeing 767-200ER, was the second. Like American Airlines 11, it was scheduled to fly from Boston to Los Angeles. When United 175 took off at 8:14\u00a0a.m., it was even lighter than the American flight: Only 56 of 168 seats were filled. When it crashed into the South Tower of the World Trade Center at 9:03\u00a0a.m., traveling , it had 9,118 gallons of fuel in its tanks. This crash was broadcast live on many television channels worldwide that were already showing the North Tower burning.\nAmerican Airlines Flight 77 was the third plane to take off. It was a Boeing 757-200. It left Washington, D.C. at 8:20\u00a0a.m. going to Los Angeles. It was two-thirds empty, with 58 passengers in its 176 seats. It was carrying 4,000 gallons of fuel, less than the 11,500 gallons it could carry. It crashed into the Pentagon\u00a0at 9:37\u00a0a.m., \u00adflying at .\nThe fourth plane, United Airlines Flight 93, was also a 757-200. It was traveling from Newark, New Jersey to San Francisco. It was scheduled to leave at 8 a.m., but was delayed for 42 minutes. When it finally took off, it carried only 37 \u00adpassengers in its 182 seats. It had a little over 7,000 gallons of fuel. At 10:03 a.m, it crashed at into an empty field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania after the passengers and crew unsuccessfully attempted to retake control of the plane to stop the hijack terrorists from hitting another landmark.\nDeaths.\nAll of the 246 people on the four planes died in the crashes. 19 terrorists were also killed in the attacks. Both towers of the World Trade Center caught on fire after the crashes. The South Tower (2 WTC) burned for 56 minutes before it fell and was destroyed. The North Tower (1 WTC) burned for 102 minutes before it also fell. As the towers fell, parts of the towers hit other buildings around them. It is believed that because of this damage, a third building, 7 World Trade Center (7 WTC), fell at 5:20\u00a0p.m. Many other buildings in the area were damaged badly and had to be demolished later, leaving the whole World Trade Center complex destroyed. 2,602 people died at the World Trade Center.\nThe plane that hit the Pentagon hit the ground just as it hit the western side of the building. It then crashed through three of the five \"rings\" that make up the Pentagon. The crash killed 125 people in the Pentagon.\nThere were 2,996 people who died in the attacks. They included firefighters and police officers trying to save the other people. They also included the 19 attackers who were all killed.\nOutcome.\nThe United States government paid an average of $1.8 million to the families of the victims of the attacks.\nThe attacks also led to the United States Department of Homeland Security being created, which protects the country from terrorist attacks.\nMany conspiracy theories have appeared which say that certain people in the United States government knew about the attacks, or even made them happen. These have been said to be false by the government.\nWar on Terror.\nAfter the attack, the United States blamed Al-Qaeda, which the U.S. thought was a terrorist group. President George W. Bush said he would start a \"War on Terror\". He meant that the United States would do more things to try to stop terrorism in the future. Bush said this was meant to protect Americans and their property from terrorists. For example, the American government would be reorganized. Security and control in public places was made stronger, especially at airports. Americans were told every day whether there was a serious threat of terrorism. (This was done by giving a color for the day. Red meant there was a high risk, green meant a low risk, and there were many levels in between.)\nThe War on Terror also led to real wars. The leader of Al-Qaeda, Osama bin Laden, lived in the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. The United States told the government of Afghanistan, called the Taliban, to turn bin Laden over to them. The Taliban would not do this. The leader of the Taliban, Mullah Muhammad Omar, demanded to see proof from the United States government. If proof was not given, Mullah Omar said that he would not hand over bin Laden. President George W. Bush said that he did not need to provide proof. The United States then went to war against Afghanistan. The Taliban was removed from power, a new government was put in power, and a new president was chosen by the people of Afghanistan.\nWhile this was happening, the United States government changed in a few ways. The United States Department of Transportation (DOT) created the Transportation Security Administration (TSA). Before 9/11, security at American airports was provided by the airlines. The TSA made it the government's job to provide airport security. New officers were hired by TSA to work at airports and to fly on planes as air marshals. The TSA also provides security on American trains and subways. A new Department of Homeland Security was also created. It became their job to protect Americans and their property inside the United States. When this department was created, the TSA moved from the DOT to Homeland Security.\nAfter defeating the Taliban, President George W. Bush thought the US should invade Iraq. He believed that Iraq helped terrorist groups, including al-Qaeda. He said he had evidence that Iraq was also making weapons of mass destruction. He sent Secretary of State Colin Powell to the United Nations to show them some of the evidence. In March, 2003, the United States began its invasion of Iraq. (Four other countries also took part, including the United Kingdom, Australia, Poland, and Denmark.) The government of Iraq was overthrown, and the people of Iraq elected a new government. No weapons of mass destruction were found in Iraq.\nOn May 2, 2011, United States Navy SEALs killed al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, who led the September 11, 2001 attacks and other terrorist attempts.\nInvestigations.\nFBI.\nImmediately after the attacks, the Federal Bureau of Investigation started PENTTBOM. This was the biggest criminal investigation in the history of the United States. At one point, more than half of the FBI's agents worked on the investigation and followed a half-million leads. The FBI concluded that there was \"clear and irrefutable (cannot be denied)\" evidence linking al-Qaeda and bin Laden to the attacks.\nThe FBI did not record the 2,977 deaths from the attacks in their annual violent crime record for 2001. New York City also did not include the deaths in their annual crime statistics for 2001.\nCIA.\nThe Inspector General of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) did a review of the CIA's pre-9/11 performance. He was very critical of senior CIA officials for not doing everything possible to stop terrorism. He criticized their failure to stop two of the 9/11 hijackers, Nawaf al-Hazmi and Khalid al-Mihdhar, as they entered the United States. He also criticized their failure to share information on the two men with the FBI. In May 2007, senators from both major U.S. political parties wrote legislation to make the review public. One of the backers, Senator Ron Wyden said, \"The American people have a right to know what the Central Intelligence Agency was doing in those critical (important) months before 9/11.\"\nCongressional inquiry.\nIn February 2002, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence created a joint inquiry into the performance of the U.S. Intelligence Community. Their 832-page report was released in December 2002. In the report, there were detailed failings of the FBI and CIA to use available information. This included information about terrorists the CIA knew were in the United States. They failed to use this information in order to stop the plans. The joint inquiry got its information about Saudi Arabian government officials possibly being involved from non-classified sources. The Bush administration demanded 28 related pages stayed classified.\nRebuilding.\nOn the day of the attacks, New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani said: \"We will rebuild. We're going to come out of this stronger than before, politically stronger, economically stronger. The skyline will be made whole again.\"\nThe damaged part of the Pentagon was rebuilt within one year of the attacks. Construction of One World Trade Center started on April 27, 2006. It reached its full height on May 20, 2013. The spire was installed on top of the building at that date. This makes the total height of 1 WTC's at 1,776 feet (541\u00a0m). This makes it the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere. One WTC finished construction and opened on November 3, 2014.\nOn the World Trade Center site, three more office towers were supposed to be built one block east of where the original towers were. 7 WTC was the first to open on May 23, 2006 after four years of construction. 4 WTC was the second tower to open on November 13, 2013. 3 WTC opened on June 11, 2018 making it the fourth skyscraper at the site to be finished."}
{"id": "5179", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5179", "title": "Cardiff", "text": "Cardiff is the capital and biggest city of Wales. It is also the 11th biggest city in the United Kingdom. Its name in the Welsh language is \"Caerdydd\". A 2011 census says that around 346,100 people live in Cardiff. It is the most important city in Wales for tourism, culture, government, sport, transport, nightlife and business. \nCardiff was declared a city in 1905, and it became the capital of Wales in 1955.\nHistory.\nThe Romans built a fort here in about 55 AD. Later, a castle was built within the walls of the fort when the city was first founded.\nIn 1404, Owain Glynd\u0175r set Cardiff on fire. Most of the buildings in Cardiff were made out of wood, so fire destroyed the city.\nDemographics.\nAt the 2011 census, the biggest ethnic group in Cardiff is White (84.7%), other groups are Asian (8%), Black (2.4%), Arab (1.4%), Mixed (2.9%)\nPlaces.\nCardiff has a big port that used to be known as Tiger Bay. It is now just called Cardiff Bay, and the Welsh Government works there. There are now lots of shops, pubs and restaurants in Cardiff Bay. Cardiff has an international airport, and is twinned with Nantes in France and Stuttgart in Germany. Cardiff has one of the largest stadiums in the United Kingdom, the Millennium Stadium, where important world sports matches and concerts happen. Other big stadiums in the city are the Cardiff City Stadium, where the main football team play, Cardiff Arms Park where the main rugby team play, and the SWALEC Stadium where cricket is played.\nThree big rivers flow through Cardiff - the Taff, the Ely and the Rhymney.\nPart of Cardiff is built on marshland.\nTransportation.\nTo get around, there are lots of bus routes and train lines in the city. There are two big train stations in Cardiff city centre, called Central station and Queen Street station, but there are also 18 other smaller stations in the city for local areas. There are lots of cycle paths in Cardiff on and off the road.\nEducation.\nCardiff has a large university, with 33,000 students, making it the tenth-largest university in Britain. The city also has 127 schools."}
{"id": "5185", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5185", "title": "Valladolid", "text": " is a city in Spain, with a population of 316,564. It is the capital of Castile and Le\u00f3n, and one of the historical capitals of the Spanish Kingdom.\nOn 19 October, 1469, Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile married secretely in the \"Palacio de los Vivero\". Also, Christopher Columbus died in the city on 20 May, 1506.\nThe river that runs through the city is known as the Pisuerga. Valladolid has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification)."}
{"id": "5194", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5194", "title": "Elizabeth Gaskell", "text": "Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell (29 September 1810 \u2013 12 November 1865) was an English writer.\nShe was born in Chelsea, London. After her mother died, she lived with her aunt in Knutsford, Cheshire. She married William Gaskell, a priest, in 1832. They lived in Manchester, where several of her books are set. She died of a heart attack in Holybourne, Hampshire.\nHer most famous books are \"Mary Barton\", \"Cranford\", \"North and South\", and \"Wives and Daughters\". She also wrote a book of the life of her friend, writer Charlotte Bront\u00eb. Some of her books have been made into movies and television programmes."}
{"id": "5198", "revid": "1138785", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5198", "title": "Venice", "text": "Venice is a city in Italy. It is the capital of the Veneto region, which is in the north-east of the country. The population of the 'Comune di Venezia', which is Venice, its lagoon and its mainland is 271,367. Area is 412\u00a0km\u00b2. The population of Venice itself keeps on shrinking at an alarming rate and is now under 55000 locals.\nVenice is built on 118 small islands that are separated by 150 canals. People cross the canals by many small bridges. They can also navigate across the city on boats, both rowing boats and motor boats. The most famous Venetian type of boat called a \"gondolas\". The buildings in Venice are very old and attractive, and tourists come from all over the world to see them and the canals. This has made Venice one of the most famous cities in the world. The most famous sights are the Rialto Bridge, St Mark's Basilica and the Doge's Palace.\nIt is important to remember that Venice is much more than few landmarks and that we owe the city a lot: from words to objects or services of our daily life. Its lifestyle and culture are unique in the world and it can get confusing at first.\nThere are several problems in Venice, but it is still the most popular tourist attraction in northeast Italy. Every year the city sinks a few millimeters because the ground is made from mud. Eventually, the city might be completely underwater, but that would take decades. Because of this, the Italian government is building the MOSE Project, a state-of-the-art defense against the sea-water flooding, that will safely protect Venice indefinitely.\nHistory.\nThe city was founded by people from the greater Veneto region as a refuge from the Barbarian invasions, when the Western Roman Empire fell. During the Middle Ages, Venice slowly grew to become an important commercial city. Around the year 1000\u00a0AD the Republic of Venice started to create an empire in the eastern Mediterranean Sea. It lasted until 1797, when it was annexed by Napoleon's France. It then changed hands a few times, becoming a part of Austria two times, before becoming part of Italy during the Italian unification. Venice deeply influenced the Venetian, Istrian and Dalmatian coasts for one thousand years.\nVenice started to lose population after its conquest by Napoleon, but with the unification of Italy the city returned to be an important city. It is actually one of the most visited places on Earth by tourists from all around the globe.\nTourism.\nThere are several ways to get around in Venice. The most common is walking and using the vaporetto, which is a water bus which carries lots of people around the city. The vaporetto goes around the City and on the Grand Canal, it does not enter the small canals of the city. To see Venice from the small canals, most tourists use the gondola. Taxi boats can also be used to move around the city and its lagoon. The Grand Canal is long and can be crossed only on a few bridges. A simple way to cross it is to take one of the traghetti (ferries). The streets, Vaporetti, and traghetti are used by the locals, it is important to remember that they are their ways to move around the city to go to school, work and do their errands.\nUsually, the warmest month is July and the coolest month is January. The maximum average precipitation occurs in November. The season of the acqua alta, high waters, are generally November to February. During the acqua alta season, the city can be partially flooded for a couple of hours on certain days.\nVenice has incredible crafts, culture, and tradition. Shopping for handmade goods such as masks, Murano glass jewels, etc. is a must. These days, however, mass tourism led Venice to be invaded by many shops selling low-quality souvenirs.\nBuying from the authentic local businesses has never been more important as it is essential to the future of the Venetians and is also the only guarantee for you to get a quality product. It is not easy, though. Thankfully, there is a social enterprise based in Venice, which works closely with the Venetian business owners, shops, restaurants, and bars included. They have a certification process where the local artisan shops attest and commit to selling products that are both authentic and sustainable as well as to give a 10% discount to the customers carrying a \"Venezia Autentica Friends' Pass\" ( buyable online for only 10 euros). The shops are part of the program are easy to spot thanks to a sticker on their door."}
{"id": "5199", "revid": "1091654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5199", "title": "Naples", "text": "Naples is a southern Italian city with a port. It faces the Mediterranean Sea and is near Mount Vesuvius. Its name in Italian is Napoli which came from its Greek name Neapolis, meaning \"new city\". It has a population of about 1 million. About 3 million live in the area around Naples (including Naples itself).\nThere is one airport in the city, Naples International Airport at Capodichino.\nHistory.\nAncient Greeks settled Naples in the 6th Century B.C. There were so many Greeks there, the Romans called it \"Magna Graecia\", which means \"Greater Greece.\" Later the Romans conquered southern Italy and took Naples. When the Roman Empire fell to invaders in the west, Naples came under the rule of the Byzantine Empire, the Greek-speaking Eastern Roman Empire.\nNaples became independent later and but was combined with the Kingdom of Sicily during the Middle Ages. By 1500 it was ruled by Arag\u00f3n, which was a kingdom in eastern Spain. Later Naples became part of Spain when Aragon and the other kingdom in Spain called Castile became one country. Naples was part of this Kingdom of Spain until the Austrian Empire got it in the War of the Spanish Succession in 1714.\nIn the 19th century it was the capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The Duchy of Savoy, or kingdom of Sardinia-Piedmont, conquered Naples in 1861. That kingdom became the Kingdom of Italy. Naples was heavily bombed when Italy fought in World War Two and British/American armies tried to capture it.\nToday Naples is the capital of Campania and the largest city in southern Italy.\nClimate.\nThe average temperature in the summer is 24\u00b0C. In the winter, the average can be as low as 8\u00b0C. There is usually around 40 inches of rain in the city every year.\nEconomy.\nNaples is Italy's fourth-largest economy, with a 2011 GDP of US$83.6 billion. The Port of Naples is one of the most important and busy ports in the Mediterranean. The city, however, still has a lot of organized crime and political corruption, but it is also famous for its musical, theatrical and cinematographic culture.\nNaples is a popular city for tourists. It was rated the 166th-most-visited city in the world in 2008.\nRecently, more people work in the service industry than in agriculture. In 2003, 31% of people worked in public services, 18% in manufacturing, 14% in commerce, 10% in construction, 8% in transportation, 7% in financial services, 5% in agriculture, 4% in the hotel business and 3% work in other fields."}
{"id": "5200", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5200", "title": "Florence", "text": "Florence () is the capital city of the region of Tuscany (\"Toscana\"), in Italy. From 1865 to 1870 the city was also the capital of the Kingdom of Italy. Florence is on the Arno River. The city has a population of around 400,000 people, and a suburban population of over 2,000,000 people. The greater area has around 956,000 people. The city was a center of medieval European trade and finance. It is often considered the birthplace of the Italian Renaissance and was long ruled by the Medici family. Florence is also famous for its fine art and architecture. It is said that, of the 1,000 most important European artists of the second millennium, 350 lived or worked in Florence.\nBuildings and monuments.\nBridges:\nMuseums:\nPalaces:\nChurches:\nSport.\nThe football team of Florence is the Fiorentina.\nCuisine.\nThe food of Florence is based more on peasant eating rather than expensive cooking. Most of foods are based on meat. The whole animal was usually eaten. Many kinds of tripe, (trippa) and (lampredotto) were commonly served. They are still sold at the food carts in the city. Antipasti include \"crostini toscani\", sliced bread topped with a chicken liver-based p\u00e2t\u00e9. Also common are sliced meats (mainly prosciutto and salami). They are often served with melon when it is in season. Tuscan bread has no salt or butter. It is used often in Florentine meals. It is very common in the local soups, \"ribollita\" and \"pappa al pomodoro\", Both soups are usually served with local olive oil. The bread is also used in the salad of bread and fresh vegetables called \"panzanella\" that is served in summer. The most famous main course is the \"bistecca alla fiorentina\". It is a huge steak of Chianina beef that is cooked over hot charcoal. It is served very rare with the \"tagliata\", sliced rare beef served on a bed of arugula, often with slices of parmesan cheese on top.\nClimate.\nFlorence has a mixed Mediterranean climate and humid subtropical climate, with hot and humid summers and cool and damp winters. Florence is especially hot from June to August (surrounded by hills in a valley cut by the Arno river). Summer temperatures are higher than those along coastlines. Winter has some snow."}
{"id": "5201", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5201", "title": "Milan", "text": "Milan (Italian: \"Milano\"; ancient \"Medhelan\" \"Mediolanum\" (City in the middle of the lands)) is a city in northern Italy. Milan is the capital of the Milano Provence and of the Lombardy Region. It is populated by 1,308,735 inhabitants.\nIt is the most populated province in Italy, and it is the second biggest city in Italy (after Rome).\nMilan is the fashion capital of the world and its important influence on design, economics, opera, and the media make it amongst the world's top 18 Global cities, along with Moscow, Buenos Aires and Kuala Lumpur.\nHistory.\nMediolanum was founded by Insubres, a Celtic people. It was captured by the Romans in 222 BC. Milan became very successful under the Roman Empire.\nMilan was ruled by the Spanish in the 1500s and the Austrians in the 1700s. During the Renaissance and the Romantic periods, Milan was a major cultural center in the whole of Europe, famous for its literature and opera.\nDuring the war, the city was badly affected by Allied bombings and during the 50s and 60s the city grew into being the wealthy and industrial metropolis it is today."}
{"id": "5226", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5226", "title": "Glamorgan", "text": "Glamorgan, also known as Glamorganshire is a county in Wales in the west of Great Britain. Glamorgan was a medieval kingdom. Its capital is Cardiff.\nThe county is home to over a million people, which is more than one third the total of Wales. It contains the cities of Cardiff, Swansea and most of the valleys that are famous for coal mining in the past."}
{"id": "5227", "revid": "1112844", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5227", "title": "Cornwall", "text": "Cornwall (Cornish: \"Kernow\") is a county in the far southwest of England in the United Kingdom. Truro is the capital of the Unitary Authority that has administered Cornwall since 2009. Truro is also the only city. It has the cathedral of the Diocese of Truro. Cornwall is home to the Cornish Language and the Cornish people. The Duchy of Cornwall is an estate which belongs to the Prince of Wales (who is also the Duke of Cornwall), but only part of it is in Cornwall. Cornwall is split from Devon by the River Tamar. Cornwall is home to Newquay, a popular town and holiday resort.\nIndustry and tourism.\nMining.\nSince 2400BC. Cornwall has been an important area for the mining of tin. In the 19th century large amounts of both tin and copper were mined in Cornwall. Mining used to be the major industry in Cornwall but now neither tin or copper are mined. China clay is in mined in small amounts.\nTourism.\nAs Mining fazed out, the tourism industry grew. five million tourists vist Cornwall every year, most of which are from within the United Kingdom. This makes up about a quarter of the Cornish economy and supports about 1 in 5 Cornish jobs.\nAgriculture and food.\nAs a mostly rural county, Cornwall naturally has a lot of farmers and farmland, with 4.9% of people in Cornwall working in agriculture. The Cornish climate and soil is not great for most crops. It is good for grass to feed dairy cows and bullocks. Flowers and vegetables such as cauliflowers are also produced in Cornwall and taken to be sold in English markets. There is also a lot of moorland parts of which are used for grazing sheep.\nCornwall is famous for being the home of the Cornish pasty and Cornish clotted cream. 12.1% of jobs in Cornwall are in the food industry. Cornwall is also known for cream teas but the jam is spread on the scones or splits first (the opposite of what is done in Devon).\nCulture and people.\nDemographics.\nCornwall has a population of approx. 550,000 and its population is divided almost equally between native Cornish and incomers from elsewhere in the UK, mostly England. 10% of people in Cornwall consider themselves as descendants of the indigenous Celtic Britons, and not English, and are recognised by Celtic organisations worldwide as such.\nLanguage.\nSome people in Cornwall have revived Cornish, a very old recently extinct Celtic language, which is related to Breton and to Welsh. There is also a dialect of the English language spoken in Cornwall known as Cornish-English.\nFlag.\nCornwall has its own flag. It's linked to the patron saint of Cornwall, St Piran, who is also the patron saint of tin miners.\nGeography.\nBodmin Moor is the largest and highest of the granite moors of Cornwall; all the high hills of Cornwall are in Bodmin Moor. The climate is generally mild, with much frontal rain. The varied scenery and historical monuments attract many tourists to Cornwall. Tintagel Castle is on the north coast of Cornwall. Falmouth harbour is one of the largest natural harbours in the world. Newquay is one of the larger holiday resorts and popular with surfers. Land's End is the headland at the far southwest of Cornwall and Lizard Point is the most southerly headland in the county. The main rivers of Cornwall are the River Camel whose estuary is next to Padstow on the north coast, the River Fal which flows into the English Channel east of Falmouth, and the River Fowey which flows into the English Channel at Fowey. Apart from Truro, the county town, the main towns of Cornwall are St Austell, Saltash, Bodmin, Launceston, Falmouth, Camborne, Redruth and Penzance.\nThe most important transport links between Devon and Cornwall are the Plymouth to Penzance railway line and the A30 and A38 major roads.\nThe Isles of Scilly are a group of islands south west of Cornwall and forming part of the county. The Isles of Scilly have a long history of shipwrecks because of the rocky coasts. There are 530 known shipwrecks around the isles."}
{"id": "5229", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5229", "title": "Tintagel Castle", "text": "Tintagel Castle is in Cornwall, a county in England.\nReginald, Earl of Cornwall built the castle on Tintagel Head (a piece of land by the sea) in about 1150. In Cornish legend, this is the place where the old Kings of Cornwall lived. Reginald built the castle for propaganda, not for military use; he wanted people to think of Camelot when they thought about him. Some people say King Arthur was born at the castle, because traditional stories say the King of Cornwall looked after him when he was a child.\nThe modern village of Tintagel was first called Trevena. Then, in the 1850s, it got a new name, to bring in tourism because of the King Arthur and Camelot legends. Tintagel is only the name of land by the sea."}
{"id": "5230", "revid": "7647622", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5230", "title": "Gwyneth Paltrow", "text": "Gwyneth Kate Paltrow (born September 28, 1972) is an American actress and singer. She was born in Los Angeles, California. \nHer father was movie director Bruce Paltrow. Her mother is actress Blythe Danner. Her brother is director Jake Paltrow. Her uncle is singer-actor Harry Danner. Her half-cousin is actress Katherine Moennig. She studied Spanish in Talavera of the Queen, Spain. Paltrow married Coldplay singer Chris Martin on December 5, 2003. The couple separated in 2014. They have a daughter, Apple (born May 14, 2004) and son, Moses (born April 8, 2006). Since 2008, she plays Pepper Potts in the Marvel Cinematic Universe which is her most famous role."}
{"id": "5231", "revid": "1071133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5231", "title": "Sarah Michelle Gellar", "text": "Sarah Michelle Gellar (born April 14, 1977) is an American actress. After several television acting roles during the 1990s, Gellar became famous for playing Buffy Summers in the television series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\". After \"Buffy\", she started acting in movies. She has starred in the family movies \"Scooby-Doo\" (2002) and \"\" (2004), the movie \"Harvard Man\" (2001), and the horror movies \"The Return\" (2006), \"The Grudge 2\" (2006), \"The Grudge\" (2004) and \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" (1997). She won an award for her part in the 1999 movie \"Cruel Intentions\".\nEarly life.\nGellar was born in New York City. She is the only child of Rosellen Greenfield and Arthur Gellar. Both of her parents were Jewish from Hungary and Russia, but Gellar's family had a Christmas tree during the holidays while she was growing up. In 1984, her parents divorced. She was raised by her mother on New York's Upper East Side. Gellar and her father did not have a good relationship from this time until his death from liver cancer on October 9, 2001. She went to school at New York's Columbia Grammar &amp; Preparatory School and the Professional Children's School. Gellar was a very good student and was a good figure skater. Her best friend was Melissa Joan Hart. Several years later, Hart was the star of the series \"Clarissa Explains It All\" and \"Sabrina, the Teenage Witch\".\nTelevision career.\nAt the age of four, Gellar was seen by an talent agent in a restaurant in Uptown Manhattan. Two weeks later, she auditioned for a part in \"An Invasion Of Privacy\", a movie made for television. The movie starred Valerie Harper, Carol Kane and Jeff Daniels. At the audition, Gellar read the lines for both her own character and Harper's character. The directors thought this was very impressive and she got the job. A short while later, she got a part in a television commercial for the fast food restaurant Burger King. In it, she said bad things about McDonald's and said she only ate at Burger King. Gellar made other commercials while doing other acting job. Some of these jobs were playing Emily in an episode of the TV series \"\", appearing in a small role in the Chevy Chase comedy movie \"Funny Farm\" and in the movie \"High Stakes\". She was also in Europe working on the TV series \"Crossbow\". In 1991, she played a young Jacqueline Bouvier in \"A Woman Named Jackie\". \nGellar's major break came in 1992. She starred in the teen soap opera \"Swan's Crossing\". After that, she got a part in another soap opera, \"All My Children\". She playing the character Kendall Hart, the long-lost daughter of character Erica Kane (Susan Lucci). In 1995, at the age of eighteen, she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Younger Leading Actress in a Drama Series for her work as Kendall Hart.\nGellar left \"All My Children\" in 1995. People were saying that her and Susan Lucci did not get along and this caused problems with them working together. She got the main role in the 1997 TV series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\". She played a teenager who had to fight many of supernatural enemies with the help of the Scooby Gang and her Watcher (a mentor). The show was well liked by both the critics and the audience. Another series, (\"Angel\"), was made based on characters from \"Buffy\". \"Buffy\" was on television for seven seasons and a total of 144 episodes. During the show, Buffy, and Gellar also, became cult icons in the United States and the UK. They were a symbol of \"empowered\" women. Gellar also sang several of the songs during the \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" musical episode \"Once More, with Feeling\".\nDuring the show's later years, Gellar said she did not like some parts of season six and the seventh season's final episode. After the show ended, Gellar said that she did not want to be in a \"Buffy\" movie. Since that time, she has said she might do it if the script is good enough. \nGellar's picture has been used on the covers of \"Cosmopolitan, Glamour, FHM, Rolling Stone\", and other magazines. She was part of Maxim's \"Hot 100\" list in 2002, 2003, and 2005, and in FHM's \"100 Sexiest Women\" of 2005. In 1998, she was named one of \"People\" Magazine's \"50 Most Beautiful People (in the World)\". Gellar has also been in the Stone Temple Pilots music video \"Sour Girl\" and is a celebrity spokesperson for the cosmetics company, Maybelline.\nMovie career.\nAfter \"Buffy\", Gellar tried to use her television fame for a movie career. Some of her movies were well liked, others were not. After roles in the popular horror movies \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" and \"Scream 2\" (both 1997), she starred in the 1999 movies \"Simply Irresistible\", a romantic comedy, and \"Cruel Intentions\". \"Cruel Intentions\" was a small hit at the box office. It made over $38 million in the United States. The movie had a lesbian kiss between Gellar and co-star Selma Blair that won the \"Best Kiss\" award at the 2000 MTV Movie Awards. Critic Roger Ebert said that Gellar is \"effective as a bright girl who knows exactly how to use her act as a tramp\".\nGellar starred as Daphne in the box office success \"Scooby-Doo\" (2002), a live-action version of the cartoon series. Gellar, Prinze and their friends Matthew Lillard and Linda Cardellini were also in the sequel \"\" (2004), which made less money than the first movie. Gellar's next movie was the 2004 horror movie \"The Grudge\". It was very well liked. Gellar appeared in the sequel \"The Grudge 2\". It opened on October 13, 2006. She has also starred in several movies that have yet to be released, including \"Southland Tales\", \"The Air I Breathe\" and \"The Girls' Guide to Hunting And Fishing\".\nPersonal life.\nGellar met her husband Freddie Prinze, Jr. during filming of the 1997 teen horror movie \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" but the two did not begin a intimate relationship until 2000. They were engaged to be married in April 2001. They got married in Jalisco, Mexico on September 1, 2002.\nIn 2004, while filming \"The Grudge\" in Japan, Gellar visited the famous Japanese swordmaker Shoji Yoshihara (Kuniie III) and bought a Katana from him as a birthday gift for her husband. Gellar found out that she needed permission from the government to take the sword out of the country. After she got permission, she said that it was incredibly difficult to do.\nGellar and her husband have two children together \u2014 a daughter born in 2009 and a son born in 2012."}
{"id": "5233", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5233", "title": "Jennifer Garner", "text": "Jenny Anne Garner (born April 17, 1972) is a Golden Globe Award- and SAG Award-winning and Emmy Award-nominated American movie and television actress, and producer. She first became famous for her role as \"Sydney Bristow\" on \"Alias\", a CIA agent. She was also in Juno, Pearl Harbor, and Dude, Where's My Car.\nGarner joined the Ban Bossy campaign in 2014."}
{"id": "5234", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5234", "title": "Heather Graham", "text": "Heather Joan Graham (born January 29, 1970 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin) is an American actress.\nHer father is a retired FBI agent. Her mother is a writer of books for children. Her sister, Aimee, is an actress and writer. Graham's parents are Catholics. They did not want their daughter to make any movies about sex. She does not talk to her parents.\nGraham was a student at the University of California, Los Angeles. She met James Woods when she was a student. She stopped going to college so she could become an actress.\nGraham was in the movie \"Drugstore Cowboy\" in 1989. In 1997, She was in the movie \"Boogie Nights\". She played a character called \"Roller Girl\". She played the character called \"Felicity Shagwell\" in the movie \"\" in 1999. She was in the movie \"From Hell\" in 2001, in which she played a character called \"Mary Kelly\".\nShe was in several episodes of the television series \"Scrubs\" in 2004 and 2005.\nGraham appeared in advertisements for Garnier hair care products and for Skyy vodka.\nGraham has dated several famous men. These include UK musician/actor Adam Ant, actors James Woods, Kyle McLachlan and Heath Ledger, and directors Stephen Hopkins and Edward Burns."}
{"id": "5235", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5235", "title": "Christina Ricci", "text": "Christina Ricci (born February 12, 1980) is an American actress. She was born in Santa Monica, California and grew up in Montclair, New Jersey."}
{"id": "5236", "revid": "1133949", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5236", "title": "Julia Roberts", "text": "Julia Fiona Roberts (born October 28, 1967) is an American actress and producer. She is best known for her roles in the movies \"Steel Magnolias\" (1989), \"Pretty Woman\" (1990), \"Runaway Bride\" (1998) and \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000). Roberts regularly plays characters of attractive powerful women. She has been among People Magazine's \"50 Most Beautiful People in the world\" eight times. \nIt is commonly mistaken that Julia's birth name is \"Julie\". Roberts has said in interviews that \"Julie\" was a nickname given to her by classmates in elementary school, and she never took well to it. She reverted to her original name \"Julia Roberts\" when she discovered that a \"Julie Roberts\" was already registered with the Screen Actors Guild. Roberts originally wanted to be a veterinarian (an animal doctor), but later studied journalism. When her brother, Eric Roberts, achieved success in Hollywood, Julia decided to try acting. Her first breakthrough came when she played in two youth-oriented movies called \"Mystic Pizza\" and \"Satisfaction\", both filmed in 1987. Roberts' sister Lisa Roberts Gillan and niece Emma Roberts are actresses.\nEarly life and family.\nRoberts was born in Smyrna, Georgia, to Betty Lou (n\u00e9e Bredemus) and Walter Grady Roberts She is of English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, German, and Swedish ancestry. Her father was a Baptist and her mother a Roman Catholic, and she was raised a Catholic. Her older brother, Eric Roberts, from whom she was estranged until 2004; sister Lisa Roberts Gillan; and niece Emma Roberts, are also actors.\nPersonal life.\nRoberts' first marriage was to musician Lyle Lovett; they divorced. She and her husband Danny Moder have three children. She gave birth to twins, Hazel Patricia and Phinnaeus Walter, in 2004. In 2007, she gave birth to a son, Henry Daniel.\nRoberts is a convert to Hinduism."}
{"id": "5237", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5237", "title": "Angelina Jolie", "text": "Angelina Jolie (; n\u00e9e Voight, formerly Jolie Pitt, born June 4, 1975) is an American actress, movie producer, screenwriter, and author. She is the daughter of Jon Voight, who is also an actor and former actress/model Marcheline Bertrand. Her full name is Angelina Jolie Voight, but she decided to go by Angelina Jolie. She grew up in Los Angeles and attended the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute. She began acting at about 12 years old, and since then has starred in many movies, including the Tomb Raider movies. She has also been in the movies \"Hackers\", \"Gathering Evidence\" (U.S. title), and \"Gone in Sixty Seconds\".\nEarly life.\nShe was born in Los Angeles, California. She is the daughter of actors Jon Voight and Marcheline Bertrand. She is the sister of actor James Haven, niece of singer-songwriter Chip Taylor, and goddaughter of actors Jacqueline Bisset and Maximilian Schell. On her father's side, Jolie is of German and Slovak descent, and on her mother's side, she is of primarily French Canadian, Dutch, and German ancestry. Like her mother, Jolie has stated that she is part Iroquois, although her only known Native American ancestor was a Huron woman born in 1649.\nCareer.\nJolie played her first leading role in the 1993 movie \"Cyborg 2\". In 1999 Jolie played Lisa Rowe in \"Girl, Interrupted\".\nShe was awarded an honorary damehood by the British government in 2014 in recognition of her work in preventing sexual violence. She was presented with the award by Queen Elizabeth II. As an American citizen, she cannot be called \"Dame Angelina\", but she can use the letters \"DCMG\" after her name.\nAwards.\nShe won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in \"Girl, Interrupted\".\nMarriage and family.\nJolie self-identifies as bisexual. She has been married to Jonny Lee Miller and Billy Bob Thornton.\nShe has three adopted children. She lives with actor Brad Pitt. Pitt and Angelina are called 'Brangelina' by the media. They have three biological children. On May 27, 2006, Jolie gave birth to a girl, Shiloh. In 2008, she also gave birth to twins, Vivienne Marcheline and Knox Leon. On August 28, 2014, Jolie married Pitt in France. In September 2016, they separated and she filed for divorce. Jolie is currently battling for full custody of her six children.\nPersonal life.\nShe said in May 2013 that she had undergone a preventive double mastectomy after learning she had an 87% risk of getting breast cancer. Jolie has a defective BRCA1 gene resulting in a very high risk of breast cancer and ovarian cancer. Jolie said she might have her ovaries removed to prevent cancer."}
{"id": "5238", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5238", "title": "Lisa Kudrow", "text": "Lisa Valerie Kudrow (b. March 30, 1963 in Encino, California) is an Australian actress. She was best known for her roles as Ursula on \"Mad About You\" and Phoebe on \"Friends\". \"Friends\" has been very popular lately and is still selling many copies, beating many popular shows even though it finished a long time ago. She also starred in P.S. I Love You playing the role Denise Hennessey."}
{"id": "5239", "revid": "658176", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5239", "title": "Grace Kelly", "text": "Grace Kelly (November 12, 1929 \u2013 September 14, 1982) was an American actress. She later married Prince Rainier III of Monaco and became Her Serene Highness The Princess of Monaco. With Prince Rainier, she had 3 children:\nKelly's father was an Irish American; her mother was a German American Her movies included three by Alfred Hitchock: \"Dial M for Murder\", \"Rear Window\", and \"To Catch a Thief\". In 1955 she won an Academy Award for \"The Country Girl\". She was the first actress to appear on a postage stamp. She was also mentioned in Billy Joel's song \"We didn't start the fire\" and in Mika's song \"Grace Kelly\" (2007). The classic head-cover of a silk scarf crossed under the chin and knotted at the side or nape of the neck is universally known as the \"Grace Kelly.\" This chic look is still copied by many female Hollywood stars when they wish to retain a degree of anonymity in the public eye.\nKelly suffered a stroke which caused her to crash her car."}
{"id": "5240", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5240", "title": "Elizabeth Taylor", "text": "Dame Elizabeth \"Liz\" Rosemond Taylor (February 27, 1932 \u2013 March 23, 2011) was a British-American actress. \nThe movies she starred in were, \"National Velvet\", \"Father of the Bride\", \"A Place in the Sun\", \"Giant\", \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\", and \"Suddenly, Last Summer\". She won the Academy Award for Best Actress for \"BUtterfield 8\". She played the title role in \"Cleopatra\", and married her costar Richard Burton. They appeared together in 11 films, including \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\". Taylor won a second Academy Award in \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\". From the mid-1970s, she appeared less frequently in film, and made occasional appearances in television and theatre.\nHer personal life included eight marriages and several life-threatening illnesses. From the mid-1980s, Taylor supported HIV and AIDS programs; she co-founded the American Foundation for AIDS Research in 1985, and the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation in 1993. She received the Presidential Citizens Medal, the Legion of Honour, the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award and a Life Achievement Award from the American Film Institute. The American Film Institute named her seventh on their list of the \"Greatest American Screen Legends\". Taylor died of congestive heart failure in March 2011 at the age of 79 after suffering many years of ill health.\nEarly life.\nTaylor was born in London to American parents, Francis Lenn Taylor and Sara Sothern, who were Americans living in England. Her parents were originally from Arkansas City, Kansas. They returned to the United States on the onset of World War II. \nActing career.\nHer first act was in \"Lassie Come Home\" (1942). The next one was \"National Velvet\" (1944). Throughout her teens, she appeared in various supporting roles and easily made the transition to young adult parts. \nHer first major role was in \"A Place in the Sun\" in 1950, with Montgomery Clift. Working steadily during the 1950s, notable movies have included; \"The Father of the Bride\" (1951), \"Ivanhoe\" (1952), \"Elephant Walk\" (1954), \"Rhapsody\" (1954), \"Giant\" (1956), \"Raintree County\" (1957), \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" (1958), \"Suddenly, Last Summer\" (1959), \"BUtterfield 8\" (1960), etc. \nIn 1963, she played the lead role in \"Cleopatra\" and met actor Richard Burton, who became her fifth husband in 1964. They appeared in several movies together; \"The V.I.P's\" (1963), \"The Sandpiper\" (1965), \"Who's afraid of Virginia Woolf ?\" (1966), \"The Taming of the Shrew\" (1967), \"Boom\" (1968). She also starred in \"Secret Ceremony\" (1969), \"X, Y and Zee\" (1972) and \"Ash Wednesday\" (1973).\nShe has won two Academy Awards for best actress, the first for her performance in \"Butterfield 8\", the second for her performance in \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\". In 1999 she won the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, a lifetime achievement award.\nPersonal life.\nTaylor often received media attention because of her many illnesses and controversial marriages to well known figures such as Conrad Hilton Jr., Michael Wilding, Mike Todd, Eddie Fisher, Richard Burton (twice), John Warner. She has two sons with Michael Wilding and a daughter with Mike Todd. She also adopted a daughter while married to Richard Burton. She was the godmother of two of Michael Jackson's children.\nActivism.\nHIV/AIDS.\nTaylor devoted consistent and generous humanitarian time, advocacy efforts, and funding to HIV and AIDS-related projects and charities. She helped to raise more than $270 million for the cause. She was one of the first celebrities and public personalities to do so at a time when few people knew about the disease and organized and hosted the first AIDS fundraiser in 1984 to benefit AIDS Project Los Angeles.\nTaylor was cofounder of the American Foundation for AIDS Research (amfAR) with Dr.\u00a0Michael Gottlieb and Dr.\u00a0Mathilde Krim in 1985. Her longtime friend and former co-star Rock Hudson had disclosed having AIDS and died of it that year. She also founded the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation (ETAF) in 1993, created to provide critically needed support services for people with HIV/AIDS. For example, in 2006 Taylor commissioned a \"Care Van\" with examination tables and xray equipment, the New Orleans donation made by her Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation and Macy's. That year, after Hurricane Katrina, Taylor donated $500,000 to the NO/AIDS Task Force, a non-profit organization serving the community of those affected by HIV/AIDS in and around New Orleans.The donation was shared by Taylor for her celebration of her 74th birthday and to help NO/AIDS Task Force continue their work on fighting AIDS.\nTaylor was honored with a special Academy Award, the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award, in 1992 for her HIV/AIDS humanitarian work. Speaking of that work, former President Bill Clinton said at her death, \"Elizabeth's legacy will live on in many people around the world whose lives will be longer and better because of her work and the ongoing efforts of those she inspired.\"\nJewish causes.\nAfter she converted to the Jewish religion, Taylor worked for Jewish causes throughout her life.\nIn 1959, her purchase of Israeli Bonds caused Arab boycotts of her films. In 1962, she was prevented from entering Egypt to complete \"Cleopatra\"; its government announced that she would not be allowed to come to Egypt because she had adopted the Jewish faith and \"supports Israeli causes\". However the ban was lifted in 1964 after it was considered that the film had brought good publicity to Egypt.\nIn 1974, Taylor and Richard Burton considered marrying in Israel, but they were unable to do so because Burton was not Jewish. Taylor helped to raise money for organizations such as the Jewish National Fund; advocated for the right of Soviet Jews to emigrate to Israel and canceled a visit to the USSR because of its disapproval of Israel due to the Six-Day War, along with signing a letter protesting the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 3379 of 1975.\nShe offered herself as a replacement hostage after more than 100 Israeli civilians were taken hostage in the Entebbe skyjacking in 1976. After the success of the operation, which freed the hostages, she acted with Kirk Douglas in a TV special, \"Victory at Entebbe\", broadcast in January, 1977. When she experienced the role, she stated, \"I couldn't pass up this opportunity. I have strong ties to Israel and I firmly believe in the courage and dedication of the Entebbe mission.\"\nIllness and death.\nTaylor had a lot of health problems. In 2004, she was diagnosed with congestive heart failure. In 2009, she underwent cardiac surgery for it. In early 2011, new symptoms related to congestive heart failure caused her to be admitted into Cedars-Sinai Medical Center for treatment. Taylor died on March 23, 2011, surrounded by her four children at the same medical center in Los Angeles, California, at the age of 79."}
{"id": "5242", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5242", "title": "Hilary Swank", "text": "Hilary Swank (born July 30, 1974) is an Academy and Golden Globe Award-winning American actress. The is the second woman in the world to win two Oscars before thirty (the first one was Jodie Foster). Swank's movies include \"Million Dollar Baby\" and \"Freedom Writers\". She will play Gail Getty in the 2018 television series \"Trust\".\nSwank was born in Lincoln, Nebraska. When she was nine she played her first role as Mowgli in her school's version of \"The Jungle Book\" by Rudyard Kipling. Afterward she often was in school and university performances."}
{"id": "5243", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5243", "title": "Nana Visitor", "text": "Nana Visitor (born July 26, 1957) is an American actress. Visitor was born in New York City. She is most famous for playing Kira Nerys in the television series \"\".\nVisitor married fellow \"Star Trek\" actor Alexander Siddig in 1997. They had a son in 1996. Visitor and Siddig divorced in 2001.\nVisitor is the niece of American actress Cyd Charisse."}
{"id": "5244", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5244", "title": "Alexander Siddig", "text": "Alexander Siddig (November 21, 1965) is a Sudanese actor. Siddig is most famous for playing Dr Julian Bashir in the \"Star Trek\" television series \"\".\nSiddig married fellow \"Star Trek\" actor Nana Visitor in 1997. They had a son in 1996. Siddig and Visitor divorced in 2001.\nSiddig is the nephew of English actor Malcolm McDowell and of former Sudanese Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi."}
{"id": "5246", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5246", "title": "Eiffel Tower", "text": "The Eiffel Tower (French: La Tour Eiffel, ], IPA pronunciation: \"EYE-full\" English; \"eh-FEHL\" French) is a landmark in Paris. It was built between 1887 and 1889 for the Exposition Universelle (World Fair). The Tower was the Exposition's main attraction.\nBackground.\nThe Eiffel Tower cost 7,799,401.31 French gold francs to build in 1889, an amount equal to $1,495,139.89 at that time. Today, its cost would equal to $36,784,020.11. It took 2 years, 2 months and 5 days to build it. The tower is tall, but this height does not include the aerial (antenna) on the top; the total height of the structure is . It has a square base that is long on each side. The second story platform is off , and the surface to be painted is . Since it has been built it has been repainted 18 times, each of these 18 paint jobs there were only 25 painters are hired to do the job. Three separate colors of paint are used on the structure in order to enhance the impression of height, with the lightest at the top.\nThere are 20,000 sparkling lights and of cables covering the structure. The paper used to print the visitors' tickets in one year weighs . The top of the tower leans away from the sun as the metal facing the sun heats up and expands, it can move as much as and grow taller. The tower was also built to sway slightly in the wind.\nHistory.\nThe Eiffel Tower was built by Alexandre Gustave Eiffel for the 100th anniversary of the French Revolution. Even though Gustave Eiffel is credited for the Eiffel Tower it was actually two lesser known people who came up with the original drawing of it. These people were Maurice Koechlin and Emile Nouguier. These two men were the chief engineers of Eiffel\u2019s engineering firm. The main architect was Stephen Sauvestre.\nKoechlin, Nouguier, Sauvestre, and Eiffel submitted the plans to compete for the spot on the champ de mars plot of land, to serve as the expositions entrance. It would also determine the 1889 world's fair centerpiece in Paris. There were 107 bids submitted to construct the Eiffel Tower. Fifty people worked on the design, and more than 100 built the parts. One hundred and thirty two workers assembled the parts on site.\nThe first digging for the foundations began on January 28, 1887 and all construction was concluded on March 31, 1889. When the tower was built, it was only meant to be kept for 20 years. People did not like the Eiffel Tower and wanted it taken down because they thought is was an ugly structure polluting the scenery of the Paris sky. After the 20 years, the tower became the property of Paris again.\nBy this time, the city had learned that the tower could be used to help with communications. There was also a metrology lab that had been installed for studies on everything from gravity to electricity. The military used the tower as a wireless telegraph transmitter for communication during battle. The tower was used in the capture of the spy \"Mata Hari\" during World War I after a message was intercepted. Today, it is used to send radio and television signals to the capital city of Paris and beyond. After people learned about the many benefits the tower provided, no one wanted it to be taken apart.\nThe Eiffel Tower joined the green energy movement by building two wind turbines on the second level. These wind turbines produce of electricity.\nConstruction.\nThere were 50 architects, engineers, and draftsmen that created 5,300 drawings of the Eiffel Tower before the construction started. Once they had a plan, there were 18,000 pieces built and prepared in Eiffel's factory outside of town. These pieces were created to the accuracy of 1/10 of a millimeter. These pieces were put together to form new pieces that were 5 meters long to be transported to the building site.\nThere were 132 workers there to assemble the pieces on site. All the pieces were put into place and hooked together by thermally assembled rivets. There were 4 men needed to assemble a single rivet: one person to heat the rivet up, another to hold it in place, a third to shape the head, and a fourth person to beat the rivet with a sledge hammer.\nOnly of the 2.5 million rivets were assembled on site. The work on the foundations took 5 months. The workers only used spades, and the rubble was taken away by horses and steam locomotives.\nThere was no problem in building the pillars on the Champ de Mars side of the tower. But on the Seine River side of the tower, foundations used compressed air and corrugated steel caissons five meters under water. The deepest foundations are 15 meters under ground. The feet of the tower are set in each of these foundation ditches. These foundations support the four pillars or truss frames.\nThe difficulty building the first floor was in bringing building materials and people up to it with a point of departure as in the elevators. The elevators had to be positioned at a slanting angle to meet the horizontal beams on the first floor. The elevator had to use hydraulic jacks to move and erect the elevator up the slanted legs. Currently the hydraulic jacks are not in use due to more advanced technology. The second floor was assembled with cranes that took the same route as the elevators. There was no troubles from this point onward in the construction."}
{"id": "5247", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5247", "title": "Louvre", "text": "The Louvre is a museum in Paris. It has has millions of visitors every year because of its art collection. It is the most visited art museum in the world.\nThe most famous piece of art in the Louvre is the \"Mona Lisa\" by Leonardo da Vinci. Other paintings include works of Rembrandt, Giambattista Pittoni, Caravaggio, Rubens, Titian and Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix. \nThere are also many statues inside the Louvre. The most famous statues are the Venus de Milo and the Winged Victory of Samothrace.\nHistory of the Louvre.\nPhilip II of France built a castle called the \"Castle of the Louvre\". It used to be where the museum is. They used the castle as a fortress to defend Paris against the Vikings.\nCharles V, King of France turned the castle into a palace. However, Francis I, King of France, knocked it down and built a new palace.\nHenry IV, King of France added the Grande Galerie to the Louvre. The Grande Galerie is more than a quarter of a mile long and one hundred feet wide. The Grande Galerie was built along the River Seine. It was the longest building in the world.\nThe building was renovated during Fran\u00e7ois Mitterand's time as French President. The glass pyramid and the inverted pyramid (made famous by \"The Da Vinci Code\", a novel and later a movie) were the work of architect I.M. Pei."}
{"id": "5248", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5248", "title": "Venus de Milo", "text": "The Venus de Milo is an ancient Greek statue. It is in the Louvre, a museum in Paris, France. The \"Venus de Milo\" represents Aphrodite, the goddess of love in Greek mythology. The statue is made of marble and is 203cm high. It is believed to be the work of Alexandros of Antioch. The \"Venus de Milo\" was found on 8 April 1820 on the Aegean island of Melos. King Louis XVIII of France presented the \"Venus de Milo\" to the Louvre in 1821. "}
{"id": "5249", "revid": "1052699", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5249", "title": "Aphrodite", "text": "Aphrodite (Ancient Greek: \u1f08\u03c6\u03c1\u03bf\u03b4\u03af\u03c4\u03b7, \"Aphrod\u00edt\u0113\") is the Ancient Greek goddess of love, beauty. She was also the goddess of procreation. Aphrodite is one of the Twelve Olympians. The most beautiful and refined of the goddesses, Aphrodite was married to Hephaestus, god of fire and metalworking. Aphrodite had numerous affairs with other beings, the most notable of these being Ares, the god of war.\nIn Homer's \"Iliad\", one of the Oceanids.\nIn Hesiod's \"Theogony\", however, Aphrodite is stated to have risen from sea foam, formed at the spot where Uranos' genitals landed, after Kronos castrated him and tossed them into the sea. Aphrodite's cult was centered on the islands of Cythera and Cyprus, both of which were claimed to be her birthplace. Her main festival was the Aphrodisia, which was celebrated annually every midsummer. The Charites (minor goddesses of grace and splendor) attended to Aphrodite and served as her handmaidens. Aphrodite's symbols include the dolphin, myrtle, rose, dove, sparrow, swan and pearl, and the dove, sparrow and swan were her sacred animals. The goddess Venus is her Roman equivalent. Aphrodite was quite often described as very beautiful, and was used as a point of comparison for female beauty - but just as she was beautiful, she just as smart and wise.\nChildren.\nEros, Phobos, Deimos, Harmonia, Pothos, Anteros, Himeros, Hermaphroditos, Rhode, Eryx, Peitho, Tyche, Eunomia, The Graces, Priapus, and Aeneas. She has 16 children in total.\nMarriage.\nAphrodite was very beautiful, which made Zeus afraid that she would be the cause of fights between the other gods. He therefore gave Aphrodite to Hephaestus. Hephaestus was happy to be married to Aphrodite and gave her many pieces of jewelry which were gifts of love, like a belt that when ever she wore it, it would make men be attracted to her. Aphrodite, however, was not attracted to him. So she spent most of her time with Ares, but she also spent time with Adonis and Anchises. She had many children."}
{"id": "5250", "revid": "117800", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5250", "title": "Venus (mythology)", "text": "In Roman mythology, Venus is the goddess of love and beauty. She was the Roman version of the Greek Aphrodite and Etruscan Turan.\nHer cult began in Ardea and Lavinium, Latium. On August 18, 293 BC, the first temple to her was built . August 18 was then a festival called the Vinalia Rustica. On April 1, the Veneralia was celebrated in honor of Venus Verticordia, the protector against vice. On April 23, 215 BC, a temple was built on the Capitol dedicated to Venus Erycina to commemorate the Roman defeat at Lake Trasum.\nVenus was also married to Vulcan, who was the god of fire, volcanoes and blacksmiths. Julius Caesar claimed Venus Genetrix as his own personal, divine ancestress."}
{"id": "5251", "revid": "7708193", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5251", "title": "Jupiter (mythology)", "text": " \nJupiter (Latin: \"Iuppiter\") is the king of the gods in Roman mythology. He was the god of the sky and thunder. His brother's name was Pluto and his sister was Ceres.\nLife of Jupiter.\nSaturn, who was the previous king of the gods, began to swallow the children that he had with his wife,(Greek equivalent Rhea), when they were born. This was because he had been warned that one of his children would overthrow him. Saturn swallowed the children Neptune, Pluto, Ceres, Juno and Vesta. When Ops realised that she was pregnant with Jupiter, she had the baby secretly and moved to Crete, giving a stone wrapped in baby clothes to Saturn for him to eat. Saturn believed he had eaten Jupiter but Jupiter was saved.\nOverthrowing Saturn.\nAfter Jupiter was raised by his mother, his destiny was to take over his own father, Saturn, as revenge for all he had done to his brothers and sisters in the past. When Jupiter grew up, he made Saturn vomit up all of the children he had swallowed. All the brothers and sisters joined forces and overthrew Saturn.\nBattle of the Titans.\nThen, with the help of the Cyclops and the Hundred-handed Giants, they declared war on Saturn and the other Titans. Jupiter finally defeated the Titans and they were imprisoned in Tartarus.\nDividing the universe.\nJupiter and his brothers divided the universe into three parts, Jupiter obtaining the heavens, Neptune the sea and Pluto the underworld. This is how Jupiter became the king of the gods."}
{"id": "5254", "revid": "6959662", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5254", "title": "Minerva", "text": "Minerva was the Roman goddess of crafts and wisdom. The Greeks called her Athena but the Romans didn't make her as warlike as Athena. As Minerva Medica she was goddess of medicine and doctors. Many coins showed her."}
{"id": "5255", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5255", "title": "Athena", "text": "Athena is the Greek goddess of wisdom and war strategy. She is one of the Twelve Olympians. Athena's symbol is the owl, the wisest of the birds. She also had a shield called Aegis, which was a present given to her by Zeus. She is often shown with her helmet on and with her shield, the shield later had Medusa's head on it, after Peresus slayed her, he gave the head of Medusa to Athena for safekeeping by which she put the head on her shield. \nAthena is the protector of Athens, Greece, a city named after her. The Parthenon, which is on the Acropolis in Athens, is her most famous temple. She also helped many heroes, including Heracles, Jason, and Odysseus, and is always seen with Nike, the goddess of victory. \nBirth.\nThere are many stories about Athena's birth. In Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Zeus married Metis, but soon after, Zeus was scared of her giving birth to a child because the Oracle of Delphi had said that she will give birth to Athena, and a son that would overthrow Zeus, just like Zeus overthrew Kronos, who overthrew his father Uranus. \nTo stop Metis giving birth to her son, Zeus came up with a plan, he played a game with Metis, they shape shifted into different animals, Metis turned turned into a fly, Zeus saw his chance and he swallowed her whole. Zeus was too late, as Metis was already pregnant.\nWhile she was inside Zeus's head, Metis made a helmet, armor, and a robe for Athena. The hammering noise caused Zeus to have a severe headache. The headache became worse then Hephaestus split his head open and Athena came out full grown and with armor on.\nTitles and patronages.\nAthena is the goddess of knowledge, purity, arts, crafts, learning, justice and wisdom. She also plays a tough, clever and independent role. Athenians thought she helped them win the Trojan war. Athena often helped heroes, especially ones who were not just brave but clever, like Jason and Perseus. People joined her cult, hoping she would give them victory. She was also an the creator of the olive tree and flute.\nAttributes and epithets.\nAthena was given many other titles. She has the epithet Ergane as the patron of craftsmen and artisans. With the epithet Parthenos she was especially worshipped in the festivals of the Panathenaea and Pamboeotia where both militaristic and athletic displays took place. With the epithet Promachos she led in battle. With the epithet Polias, Athena was the protector of not only Athens but also of many other cities, including Argos, Sparta, Gortyn, Lindos, and Larisa."}
{"id": "5257", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5257", "title": "Salt Lake City", "text": "Salt Lake City is a city in the United States of America. It is the capital and largest city of the state of Utah. It was founded by the Mormons and is the official headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is named after the Great Salt Lake, which it is near. The city's population was estimated at 191,180 in 2013.\nThe city was founded in 1847 by Brigham Young and his Mormon followers. They extensively irrigated and cultivated the arid valley. Due to its proximity to the Great Salt Lake, the city was originally named \"Great Salt Lake City\"\u2013the word \"great\" was dropped from the official name in 1868. Although Salt Lake City is still home to the headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), less than half the population of Salt Lake City proper is Mormon today.\nImmigration of international LDS members, mining booms, and the construction of the first transcontinental railroad initially brought economic growth, and the city was nicknamed the \"Crossroads of the West\". It was traversed by the Lincoln Highway, the first transcontinental highway, in 1913, and presently two major cross-country freeways, I-15 and I-80, intersect in the city. Salt Lake City has since developed a strong outdoor recreation tourist industry based primarily on skiing. It was host to the 2002 Winter Olympics. It is the industrial banking center of the United States.\nEducation.\nIn 1847 pioneer Jane Dillworth held the first classes in her tent for the children of the first LDS families. In the last part of the 19th century, there was much controversy over how children in the area should be educated. LDS and non-LDS parents could not agree on the level of religious influence in schools. Today, many LDS youths in grades 9 through 12 attend some form of religious instruction, referred to as seminary. Students are released from public schools at various times of the day to attend seminary. LDS seminaries are usually located on church-owned property adjacent to the public school and within walking distance.\nBecause of high birth rates and large classrooms, Utah spends less per student than any other state. At the same time, Utah spends more per capita than any state with the exception of Alaska. Recently, money was approved for the reconstruction of more than half of the elementary schools and one of the middle schools in the Salt Lake City School District, which serves most of the area within the city limits. There are twenty-three K-6 elementary schools, five 7-8 middle schools, three 9-12 high schools (Highland, East, and West, with the former South High being converted to the South City campus of the Salt Lake Community College), and an alternative high school (Horizonte) located within the school district. In addition, Highland has recently been selected as the site for the charter school Salt Lake School for the Performing Arts (SPA). Many Catholic schools are located in the city, including Judge Memorial High School. Rowland Hall-St. Mark's School, established in 1867 by Episcopal Bishop Daniel Tuttle, is the area's premier independent school.\nThe Salt Lake City Public Library system consists of the main library downtown, and five branches in various neighborhoods. The main library, designed by renowned architect Moshe Safdie, opened in 2003. In 2006, the Salt Lake City Public Library was named \"Library of the Year\" by the American Library Association.\nColleges in Salt Lake City include the University of Utah, Westminster College, Salt Lake Community College, Stevens-Henager College, Eagle Gate College, The Art Institute of Salt Lake City and LDS Business College. Utah State University and BYU also operate education centers in the city. There are also many trade and technical schools such as Healing Mountain Massage School and the Utah College of Massage Therapy. The University of Utah has good research and medical programs. It was one of the original four universities to be connected to ARPANET, the predecessor to the Internet, in 1969, and was also the site of the first artificial heart transplant in 1982."}
{"id": "5258", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5258", "title": "Nagano, Nagano", "text": "Nagano () is a city in Japan. It is the capital of Nagano Prefecture ().\nNagano has been recognized as a core city since 1999.\nAs of October 1, 2007, 2,182,190 people lived in Nagano.\nHistory.\nIn 1998, the Olympic Games were held in Nagano."}
{"id": "5259", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5259", "title": "Barcelona", "text": "Barcelona is the capital city of Catalonia, which is a region of Spain. Barcelona is the largest city on the Mediterranean coast. The city is between the rivers of \"Llobregat\" and \"Bes\u00f2s\", and south of the Pyrenees mountains. It has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\" in the Koeppen climate classification).\nIn 1992, Barcelona hosted the Summer Olympic Games. Many new parks were opened and other significant changes to the city were made. One example is opening the new beaches in the Poble Nou area.\nIn 2007, about 1.6 million people lived in Barcelona. Around 3.1 million people live in the Metropolitan Area and 4.9 million people live in the Urban Region. Barcelona is the second most populated city in Spain, and the tenth in the European Union.\nBarcelona is home to football team F.C. Barcelona.\nHistory.\nThe origin of Barcelona is unclear. The ruins of an early settlement have been found dating to earlier than 5000 BC.\nDuring the Roman Empire, Barcelona was a colony of the Western Roman Empire called \"Barcino\" (full name was \"Colonia Faventia Julia Augusta Pia Barcino).\" A clear example of the Roman heritage in Barcelona is the preserved \"Barri G\u00f2tic\" (Gothic Quarter) in the center of city.\nIn the Middle Age (5th century), Barcelona was conquered by the Visigoths. King Athaulf moved his capital here for a short time. In 511, a battle between the Ostrogoths and Visigoths took place near the city in which the Ostrogoths won.\nIn 8 century, Barcelona was conquered by the Moors.\nUntil the 15th century, Barcelona was the leading slave trade centre. Barcelona was a centre of Catalan separatism for a long time. \nDuring the Spanish Civil War, Barcelona was Republican city. \nCulture.\nBarcelona's culture roots go back 2000 years. \nThe city is a very religious, so there are many cathedrals in it. The most famous of them is Sagrada Familia. Barcelona Cathedral is also popular among the tourists. \nBarcelona has a large number of theaters such as \"Palau de la M\u00fasica Catalana, Liceu etc.\" Barcelona has an symphony orchestra. \nThere are also many museums. For example, Museu Nacional d'Art, Museu Picasso, Museu Mar\u00edtim, Museu d Hist\u00f2ria de la Ciutat Barcelona, Museu d\u2019Art Contemporani de Barcelona and Museu de la Xocolata. \nThe street called La Rambla is a place for street performances such as mime performances. The Sonar Festival and Primavera Sound Festival are two major pop music festivals that take place yearly there. \nBarcelona has one of Europe's largest aquariums \u2013 Aquarium Barcelona. \n\"El Peri\u00f3dico de Catalunya, La Vanguardia\" and \"Ara\" are three major newspapers of Barcelona.\nMany popular films were also shot in Barcelona. The examples are \"Todo sobre mi madre (1999) by\" Pedro Almod\u00f3var\", REC (2007), Salvador (2006), Vicky Christina Barcelona (2008), Biutiful (2010), Tres metros sobre el cielo. Tengo ganas de ti (2012).\"\nEconomics.\nBarcelona was for a long time an industrial city. Currently, factories have been moved to the periphery, a fact that has allowed us to transform the former industrial neighbourhoods in the residential areas, from research to products with high added value and services. The most representative industrial sectors of Barcelona are the textile industry, chemical, pharmaceutical, automotive, electronics, medical Industry and printing. Services Barcelona stands out for its logistics activities, publishing and computer.\nTransport.\nBarcelona has a port, metro, airport, modern passengers trains by Renfe company and tram systems called Trambaix and Trambesos. \nBarcelona is one of the main railway hubs in Spain. The main railway station is \"Sants Estaci\u00f3.\" \nBarcelona has also a metered taxi fleet. \nSport.\nBarcelona is a very sports city. It hosted the highly successful 1992 Summer Olympics. \nFC Barcelona is a sport club, one of the largest and the second richest in the world.\nTourism.\nBarcelona is one of the most important tourist destinations in Europe, with millions of people visiting every year. The city is famous for its 19th century modernist architecture. The best known of those buildings was designed by Antoni Gaudi. It is the unfinished church Sagrada Familia, which is the symbol of Barcelona.\nIt is known for its tapas food, a meze. Among the dishes, the also popular are paella, gazpacho, jamon, crema catalana and sangria. \nThe popular stores for shopping are Zara, Massimo Dutti, Bimba y Lola, Adolfo Dominguez. \nEducation.\nBarcelona has a very good higher education. The most prominent university is the University of Barcelona which has a long history. \nLanguage.\nThe main language of Barcelona is considered Catalan. Spanish is the second popular language. \n(write about the problems of language) \nSister cities.\nBarcelona has sister relationships with many places worldwide:"}
{"id": "5260", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5260", "title": "Denise Lewis", "text": "Denise Lewis (born 27 August 1972) is a British retired athlete from West Bromwich. She won the bronze medal in the heptathlon at the 1996 Summer Olympics. She won the gold medal in the heptathlon at the 2000 Summer Olympics.\nIn late 2004, she was a contestant in the second series of \"Strictly Come Dancing\"."}
{"id": "5267", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5267", "title": "Michael Johnson", "text": "Michael Duane Johnson (born in September 13, 1967), Dallas, Texas is an American retired sprinter. He is widely considered the greatest long sprinter of all time. During his time on the track, he established world records for the 400 m (43.18 Seville, Spain), indoor 400 m, indoor 300 m, 200 m, and 4 \u00d7 400 m relay. Due to these achievements, and due to the vast difference between the 200 m and 400 m, Johnson left little doubt that he is the greatest sprinter of all time. He won four Olympic gold medals and eight World Championships gold medals.\nA fifth Olympic gold medal was taken back when it was learned that Johnson's teammates had cheated by using drugs.\nJohnson had a unique upright posture when he ran so that he looked like a duck walk, which gave him the nickname \"The Duck\". His running gait did not make sense for running fast, but somehow worked. He won almost every race that he ever ran.\nHe was the first athlete to win both the 200m and 400m sprints in the same Olympic Games (Atlanta, Georgia).\nHe retired in 2001, and is a sports commentator on TV. He was a contestant in the 2010 season of \"The Celebrity Apprentice\"."}
{"id": "5268", "revid": "183741", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5268", "title": "Icelandic", "text": "Icelandic might mean:"}
{"id": "5269", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5269", "title": "Micheal Johnson", "text": ""}
{"id": "5285", "revid": "585766", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5285", "title": "Bronze Age", "text": "The Bronze Age is the time period when people made tools from an alloy (a mixture of metals) called bronze. Bronze is a mixture of mainly copper and tin: usually nine parts copper to one part tin. Materials like wood and stone were also used for tools, but bronze was better for cutting and chopping, and was easy to shape. The Bronze Age was not at the same time everywhere, because different groups of people began to use bronze at different times. In Western Europe, the Bronze Age lasted from about 2000 BC until 800 BC. In the Middle East, it started about a thousand years earlier. For example, bronze was first used in Mesopotamia around 3300 BC.\nArchaeologists think that people became more organised in the Bronze Age, because the making of metal tools was difficult and needed certain skills. The people who had these new skills would have been important. The new metal tools were bought, sold, or traded across larger distances.\nLater, when iron tools spread, the Bronze Age ended and the Iron Age started. A reason for iron replacing bronze is that tin ore, a rock in which tin may be found, is much more rare than iron ore. Copper tools were less useful because they were too soft. \nAgriculture.\nBy the Bronze Age, wild food was no longer a main part of the diet. The title \"inventors of agriculture\" might go to the Sumerians, starting c. 5500 BC.\nFarming allows more people in an area than can be supported by hunting and gathering. Crops can be stored for off-season use, or to sell or barter. Farmers could feed people to do other things than agriculture. This was a crucial factor in the rise of full-time armies.\nSumerian agriculture allowed them to win battles and land. This made them early empire builders. Not long after, the Egyptians, farming in the fertile Nile valley, increased their population. There were now enough warriors to conquer more land, tripling the Sumerian empire in area.\nIn Sumer, barley was the primary crop; wheat, flax, dates, apples, plums, vegetables and grapes were grown as well. Mesopotamian agriculture was both supported and limited by flooding of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. Floods came in late spring or early summer from snow melting from the Anatolian mountains.\nSheep, wolves, cows and goats were domesticated, kept mainly for meat, milk, butter and cheese. Ur, a large town that covered about 50 acres (20 hectares), kept 10,000 animals; 3,000 were slaughtered every year. The city's population of 6,000 included a labour force of 2,500, cultivated 3,000 acres (12\u00a0km\u00b2) of land. The labor force included storehouse recorders, work foremen, overseers, and harvest supervisors as well as laborers.\nThe land was plowed by teams of oxen pulling light unwheeled plows and grain was harvested with sickle. Wagons had solid wheels covered by leather tires kept in position by copper nails and were drawn by oxen. As many as four animals could pull a wagon at one time. The horse was domesticated in Ukraine around 4000 BC, and was in use by the Sumerians around 2000 BC."}
{"id": "5286", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5286", "title": "The Vikings", "text": ""}
{"id": "5289", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5289", "title": "Louis XIV", "text": "Louis XIV, also popularly known as the Sun King (5 September 1638\u20131 September 1715) was the King of France and King of Navarre from 14 May 1643 until his death. He was a king for 72 years. This was the longest recorded rule of any European monarch. He is often seen as the typical example of absolutism. He was the older of two brothers the other being Philippe. The two were very close and Philippe was later created the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans.\nEarly life and reign.\nLouis' parents were Louis XIII and Anne of Austria. He was the unexpected child of King Louis XIII and Anne of Austria, who had not had children in their 22-year marriage. He was christened Louis Dieudonn\u00e9 (literally, \u201cgift of God\u201d). In 1643, before his fifth birthday, his father died, and Louis inherited the throne of France. Because Louis XIV was too young to rule, his mother ruled France with Cardinal Mazarin, the Italian financier who had been the principal minister of Louis XIII. Mazarin had guided the nation through the later stages of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648). In this war France struggled against the Habsburg dynasty that ruled Spain for military supremacy in Europe. \nAbsolute monarch.\nAfter Mazarin died in 1661, Louis declared that he would rule France without a chief minister, something no French king had done in living memory. He intended to rule as an absolute monarch, believing that his power as king was derived from God and that he was responsible to God alone. He was obliged to rule for the benefit of his people. While Louis assumed responsibility for decision making, he understood that he must rule within the constraints of the laws and customs of his kingdom. Louis consulted widely with his nobles and ministers, and he met weekly with members of his high council. He created an informal cabinet, which was eventually led by Jean-Baptiste Colbert, chief minister of finance. \nNevertheless, the system of absolute monarchy emphasized the role of the king, and no monarch was more successful in creating the image of monarchy than Louis XIV. He took the sun as his emblem and connected himself to its radiant image.\nConstruction of Versailles.\nStarting in 1661, King Louis XIV transformed a humble hunting lodge into a glittering palace. Over 30,000 men worked on constructing the Palace of Versailles, a project that drained the royal treasury for decades. Expenses included not only building but also diverting rivers, piping in fresh water, and planting thousands of orange trees to mask the smell of sewage that could not be properly drained away. In May 1682, Louis moved the capital of France to Versailles, 12 miles away of Paris. It was Louis XIV's motive to remove himself and his nobles from the political intrigues of Paris. It became a symbol of his Absolute Monarchy.\nExpansion of French power in Europe.\nAlthough Louis dreamed of a Spanish inheritance for his heirs, his military policy was not to expand French territory. He fought his early wars for defensive purposes\u2014to secure France\u2019s northern border and to dislodge the Spanish from strategic towns.\nLouis fought the War of the Devolution (1667-1668) to assert his claims to a portion of Spain\u2019s possessions after his wife\u2019s father, Philip IV, died. Louis claimed the Spanish Netherlands in place of the wedding gift that Philip IV had never paid. \nThe French aggression in the Spanish Netherlands caused relations between France and Holland to deteriorate. The Dutch had already fought the Spanish for generations to protect against an invasion of their country. They had no intention of allowing the French to pose the same threat by occupying the territories on their border. The result was war in the Netherlands from 1672 to 1678, during which Louis again demonstrated the effectiveness of French might. In a sweeping campaign, Louis almost succeeded in conquering Holland. To protect themselves, the Dutch opened their dikes, flooded the countryside, and turned Amsterdam into a virtual island. Louis\u2019s armies could not advance farther, and they began negotiating a truce. War resumed, however, when Spain and Austria allied themselves with Holland, and Louis signed a treaty with England in 1670 to keep the English navy neutral. Neither side could win a decisive victory, and both suffered from financial exhaustion, which ultimately led to a treaty to end the war. \nLater reign.\nLouis revoked, or ended, the Treaty of Nantes. This Treaty said that there would be freedom of religion in France. This means that everybody in France could worship the way they wanted to. When Louis revoked the Treaty of Nantes, he said that all people in France must be Catholic. Because of this, 50 thousand Protestant workers left France and went to America, England, and Germany. \nWhile Louis ruled, France became the most powerful country in all of Europe, and many other countries copied the French people's way of dressing and thinking. He also encouraged people to explore Canada, and tried very hard to make France larger. Louis spent a lot of money on wars, and France went into deep debt because of him.\nDecline.\nBy the middle of the 1680s the Sun King was losing much of his shine. Mazarin had taught him to work rigorously, and Louis maintained a punishing schedule throughout his life, shrugging off a series of minor illnesses and not listening to the advice of his physicians. Eventually a broken arm put an end to his vigorous horseback riding, and gout ended his long walks around Versailles. He was wheeled to the throne room or carried to his carriage. In 1683 his first wife died, and Louis secretly married his longtime mistress, Fran\u00e7oise d\u2019Aubign\u00e9, Marquise de Maintenon. In 1711 he went through the tragedy of the death of his oldest son and the following year that of his oldest grandson. Therefore, the kings successor was his little five year old great grandson Louis Duke of Anjou, who became King Louis XV of France after the death of his great-grandfather in 1715.\nFrench kings after Louis XIV taxed a lot of money from the poor people to try and pay off the debt. This is part of what led to the French Revolution.\nLegacy.\nIn a world that regarded territory, power, and wealth as paramount, Louis XIV was recognized as a great king. He transformed France into the dominant nation in Europe, expanded its boundaries, and left his heirs secure in their possessions. Louis reached the height of his power in the 1670s, and he protected what he had achieved for the next four decades in the face of a Europe united against him. Moreover, he eventually realized his dream of seeing a Bourbon on the Spanish throne. During Louis\u2019s reign, France also consolidated the administration of its colonial possessions and commerce, becoming a world power. On the domestic front, Louis strengthened the central government\u2019s control over the diverse regions of France, incorporating his territorial gains into a united state. On the other hand, he provoked controversy when he restored Catholic religious unity by revoking the Edict of Nantes and repressing Protestantism. Unfortunately many of Louis\u2019s policies, both domestic and foreign, caused great hardship to ordinary people, many of whom suffered starvation, fled their homeland, or lived in terror of persecution. Ultimately, Louis XIV wished to bring glory to France and to his dynasty, and he died believing that he had."}
{"id": "5290", "revid": "115351", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5290", "title": "Olympic Games", "text": "The Olympic Games () is an important international event featuring summer and winter sports. Summer Olympic Games and Winter Olympic Games are held every four years. Originally, the ancient Olympic Games were held in Ancient Greece at Olympia. The first games were in 776 BC. They were held every four years until the 6th century AC. The first \"modern\" Olympics happened in 1896 in Athens, Greece. Athletes participate in the Olympics Games to represent their country.\nOver time the Olympics have become bigger. In old times, women were not allowed, but now there are women's events. The Winter Games were created for ice and snow sports. The Paralympic Games were created for athletes with physical disabilities. As well, the Olympics became bigger with the addition of the Youth Olympic Games for teenage athletes. World War I and World War II led to the cancellation of the 1916, 1940, and 1944 Games. As the decision-making body, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) is responsible for choosing the host city for each Olympic Games. The IOC is also responsible for choosing what sports are in the games. The creator of modern Olympics is Baron Pierre de Coubertin.\nThe celebration of the Games includes many rituals and symbols, such as Olympic flag and torch, as well as the opening and closing ceremonies. The first, second, and third-place finishers in each event receive, respectively, gold, silver, and bronze medals.\nAncient Olympics.\nThe Olympics of Ancient Greece featured mainly athletic but also combat and chariot racing events. During the Olympic Games all struggles among the participating city-states were postponed until the games were finished. The origin of these Olympics is shrouded in mystery and legend According to legend, it was Heracles who first called the Games \"Olympic\" and established the custom of holding them every four years. The most widely accepted date for the beginning of the Ancient Olympics is 776BC; based on inscriptions of the winners of a footrace held every four years starting then. The Ancient Games featured running events, a pentathlon (consisting of a jumping event, discus and javelin throws, a foot race and wrestling), boxing, wrestling, and equestrian events.\nThere is no agreement on when the Games officially ended, but many historians think it is 393AD, when the emperor Theodosius I declared that all Pagan religious practices should end. Another date might be 426AD, when the next emperor Theodosius II ordered the destruction of all Greek temples. After the Olympics stopped, they were not held again until the late 19th century.\nThe Growth of the Olympics.\nAn attempt to copy the ancient Olympic Games was the \"L'Olympiade de la R\u00e9publique\n annually from 1796 to 1798 in Revolutionary France. The competition had several sports from the ancient Greek Olympics.\nGreek interest in bringing back the Olympic Games began with the Greek War of Independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1821. It was first proposed by poet and newspaper editor Panagiotis Soutsos in his poem \"Dialogue of the Dead\", published in 1833. Evangelis Zappas, a wealthy Greek-Romanian philanthropist, first wrote to King Otto of Greece, in 1856, offering to fund a permanent revival of the Olympic Games. Zappas sponsored the first Olympic Games in 1859, which was held in Athens. Athletes from Greece and the Ottoman Empire participated. Zappas funded the restoration of the ancient Panathenaic stadium so that it could host all future Olympic Games.\nBetween 1862 and 1867, Liverpool held an annual Grand Olympic Festival. It was created by John Hulley and Charles Melly, with support from Dr. Brookes. These games were unfair in nature since only Men could compete. In 1865 Hulley, Dr. Brookes and E.G. Ravenstein founded the National Olympian Association in Liverpool, a forerunner of the British Olympic Association. Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the International Olympic Charter.\nDr. Brookes copied the sports which were in the Olympics held in Athens in 1859 in future Wenlock Olympian Games (Brookes created this first as a class in 1850 and then as an event in 1856.). In 1866, a national Olympic Games in Great Britain was organized by Dr. Brookes at London's Crystal Palace.\nThe Panathinaiko Stadium hosted Olympics in 1870 and 1875. Thirty thousand spectators attended that Games in 1870, although no official attendance records are available for the 1875 Games. In 1890, after attending the Olympian Games of the Wenlock Olympian Society, Baron Pierre de Coubertin created the International Olympic Committee. Coubertin built on the ideas and work of Brookes and Zappas with the aim of creating an Olympic Games that would occur every four years in a different country. He presented these ideas during the first meeting of the newly created International Olympic Committee (IOC). This meeting was held from June 16 to June 23, 1894, at the Sorbonne University in Paris. On the last day of the meeting, it was decided that the first Olympic Games, to be controlled by the IOC, would take place two years later in Athens. The IOC elected the Greek writer Demetrius Vikelas as its first president.\n1896 Games.\nThe first Games held under the IOC was hosted in the Panathenaic stadium in Athens in 1896. These Games brought 14 nations and 241 athletes who competed in 43 events. Zappas and his cousin Konstantinos Zappas had left the Greek government money to fund future Olympic Games. This money was used to pay for the 1896 Games. George Averoff paid for the refurbishment of the stadium in preparation for the Games. The Greek government also provided money, which was paid back through the sale of tickets. Money was also paid back through the sale of the first Olympic commemorative stamp set.\nThe Greek officials and public were excited about hosting these Games. This feeling was shared by many of the athletes, who even demanded that Athens be the host of the Olympic Games on a permanent basis. The IOC did not approve this request. The IOC stated that each games would be held in a different country.\nChanges and adaptations.\nFollowing the success of the 1896 Games, the Olympics entered a period of stagnation that threatened their survival. The Olympic Games held at the Paris Exposition in 1900 and the World's Fair at St. Louis in 1904 were side-shows. The Games at Paris did not have a stadium, however this was the first time women took part in the games. The St. Louis Games hosted 650 athletes, but 580 were from the United States. The homogeneous nature of these celebrations was a low point for the Olympic Movement. The Games rebounded when the Intercalated Games (so-called because they were the second Games held within an Olympiad, a period of time lasting four years) were held in Athens. These Games are not officially recognized by the IOC and no Intercalated Games have been held since. These Games were hosted at the Panathenaic stadium in Athens. The games attracted an international field of participants and generated great public interest.\nBetween 1912 and 1948 art competitions were a part of the Olympics. Medals were awarded for works of art inspired by sport, divided into five categories: architecture, literature, music, painting, and sculpture. The juried art competitions were abandoned in 1954 because artists were considered to be professionals, while Olympic athletes were required to be amateurs. The competitions were part of the original intention of the Olympic Movement.\nWinter Games.\nThe Winter Olympics were created for snow and ice sports that were not part of the Summer Games. Figure skating (in 1908 and 1920) and ice hockey (in 1920) were Olympic events at the Summer Olympics. At the 1921 Olympic Congress, in Lausanne, it was decided to hold a winter version of the Olympic Games. A winter sports week (actually 11 days) was held in 1924 in Chamonix, France. The IOC ruled that the Winter Olympic Games be celebrated every four years on the same year as the summer games. This pattern continued until the 1992 Games in Albertville, France. After this, beginning with the 1994 Games, the Winter Olympics were held on the third year of each Olympiad.\nYouth Games.\nStarting in 2010, Youth Games help to develop young athletes for the Olympic Games. Athletes between the ages of 14 and 18 compete. The Youth Olympic Games were created by IOC president Jacques Rogge in 2001 and approved during the 119th meeting of the IOC. The first Summer Youth Games were held in Singapore from 14\u201326 August 2010. The first Winter Games was hosted in Innsbruck, Austria, in 2012. These Games are shorter than the Olympic Games. The summer version will last twelve days and the winter version will last nine days. The IOC will allow 3,500 athletes and 875 officials to take part at the Summer Youth Games. 970 athletes and 580 officials will take part at the Winter Youth Games. The sports to be played will be the same as at the Olympic Games.\nOlympic Movement.\nThe Olympic Movement includes a large number of national and international sporting organizations and federations. As the group in charge of the Olympic Movement, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) is responsible for selecting the host city. Overseeing the planning of the Olympic Games. Changing the sports involved. Agreeing sponsorship and broadcasting rights.\nThe Olympic Movement is made of three major elements:\nFrench and English are the official languages of the Olympic Movement. The other language used at each Olympic Games is the language of the host country.\nControversy.\nIn 1998, it was uncovered that several IOC members had taken bribes from members of the Salt Lake City bid committee for the hosting of the 2002 Winter Olympics. This was done to make sure that Salt Lake City won. The IOC investigated and four members resigned and six people were sacked.\nA BBC documentary entitled \"Panorama: Buying the Games\", aired in August 2004, investigated the taking of bribes in the bidding process for the 2012 Summer Olympics. The documentary claimed it was possible to bribe IOC members into voting for a particular candidate city. After being narrowly defeated in their bid for the 2012 Summer Games, Parisian Mayor Bertrand Delano\u00eb accused the British Prime Minister Tony Blair and the London Bid Committee of breaking the bid rules.\nThe Turin bid for the 2006 Winter Olympics was also shrouded in controversy. A prominent IOC member, Marc Hodler, strongly connected with the rival bid of Sion, Switzerland, alleged bribery of IOC officials by members of the Turin Organizing Committee. These accusations led to a wide-ranging investigation. The allegations also served to sour many IOC members against Sion's bid and potentially helped Turin to capture the host city nomination.\nSymbols.\nThe Olympic logo also known as the Olympic rings, consists of five intertwined rings and represents the unity of the five inhabited continents (America, Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe). The colored version of the rings\u2014blue, yellow, black, green, and red\u2014over a white field forms the Olympic flag. The flag was adopted in 1914 but flown for the first time at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp, Belgium. The flag has since been flown during every Games. The Olympic motto is \"Citius, Altius, Fortius\", a Latin expression meaning \"Faster, Higher, Stronger\".\nBefore each Games, the Olympic flame is lit in Olympia in a ceremony that reflects ancient Greek rituals. A female performer, acting as a priestess, lights a torch with the use of the sun. The woman then lights the torch of the first relay bearer. Starting the Olympic torch relay that will carry the flame to the host city's Olympic stadium. The flame has been an Olympic symbol since 1928 and the torch relay was introduced at the 1936 Summer Games.\nThe Olympic mascot was introduced in 1968. The mascot is either an animal or human figure representing the cultural heritage of the host country.\nCeremonies.\nOpening.\nAs mandated by the Olympic Charter, various elements frame the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games. Most of these rituals were established at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp. The ceremony typically starts with the hoisting of the host country's flag and a performance of its national anthem. The host nation then presents artistic displays of music, singing, dance, and theater representative of its culture.\nAfter the artistic portion of the ceremony, the athletes parade into the stadium grouped by nation. Greece is traditionally the first nation to enter in order to honor the origins of the Olympics. Nations then enter the stadium alphabetically according to the host country's chosen language. The host country's athletes are always the last to enter. During the 2004 Summer Olympics, which was hosted in Athens, Greece. The Greek flag entered the stadium first and last. When it came in to the stadium for the second time it was followed by the athletes. Speeches are then given formally opening the Games. Finally the athletes oath said. Following this the Olympic torch is brought into the stadium and passed on until it reaches the final torch carrier who lights the cauldron.\nClosing.\nThe closing ceremony of the Olympic Games takes place after all sporting events have concluded. Flag-bearers from each participating country enter the stadium. They are followed by the athletes who enter together without any national distinction.\nThree national flags are hoisted while the corresponding national anthems are played. The flag of Greece to honor the birthplace of the Olympic Games. The flag of the current host country. The flag of the country hosting the next Summer or Winter Olympic Games is also flown. \nThe president of the organizing committee and the IOC president make their closing speeches. The Games are officially closed and the Olympic flame is put out. \nIn what is known as the Antwerp Ceremony (as this tradition was started in Antwerp), the mayor of the city that organized the Games transfers a special Olympic flag to the president of the IOC. The president then passes it on to the mayor of the city hosting the next Olympic Games. \nAfter these compulsory elements, the next host nation briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theater representative of its culture.\nMedal presentation.\nA medal ceremony is held after each Olympic event is concluded. The winner, second and third-place competitors or teams stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum to be awarded their respective medals. After the medals are given out by an IOC member, the national flags of the three medalists are raised while the national anthem of the gold medalist's country plays.\nSports.\nThe Olympic Games program consists of 26 sports, 30 disciplines and nearly 300 events. For example, wrestling is a Summer Olympic sport, comprising two disciplines: Greco-Roman and Freestyle. It is broken down into fourteen events for men and four events for women. Each event represents a different weight class. The Summer Olympics program includes 26 sports, while the Winter Olympics program features 15 sports.\nOlympic sports are governed by international sports federations (IFs) recognized by the IOC as the global supervisors of those sports. There are 35 federations represented at the IOC. Changes can happen to the list of sports in the Olympics. Sports can be added or removed from the list on the basis of a two-thirds majority vote of the members of the IOC.\nThe 114th IOC meeting, in 2002, limited the Summer Games program to a maximum of 28 sports, 301 events, and 10,500 athletes. Three years later, at the 117th IOC Session, the first major change to the list was performed. This resulted in the removal of baseball and softball from the list of sports for the 2012 London Games. Since there was no agreement in the promotion of two other sports, the 2012 program will feature just 26 sports. The 2016 and 2020 Games will return to the maximum of 28 sports given the addition of rugby and golf.\nAmateurism and professionalism.\nThe exclusion of professionals caused several controversies throughout the history of the modern Olympics. The 1912 Olympic pentathlon and decathlon champion Jim Thorpe was stripped of his medals when it was discovered that he had played semi-professional baseball before the Olympics. His medals were restored by the IOC in 1983 on compassionate grounds. As class structure evolved through the 20th century, the definition of the amateur athlete as an aristocratic gentleman became outdated. The advent of the state-sponsored \"full-time amateur athlete\" of the Eastern Bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage. Nevertheless, the IOC held to the traditional rules regarding amateurism.\nBeginning in the 1970s, amateurism requirements were gradually phased out of the Olympic Charter. After the 1988 Games, the IOC decided to make all professional athletes eligible for the Olympics, subject to the approval of the IFs.\nAs of 2004, the only sport in which no professionals compete is boxing, although even this requires a definition of amateurism based on fight rules rather than on payment, as some boxers receive cash prizes from their National Olympic Committees. In men's football (soccer), only three professional players over the age of 23 are eligible to participate per team in the Olympic tournament.\nControversies.\nBoycotts.\nThere have been many countries deliberately missing the Olympics in order to make political statements. The most famous examples of countries missing the Olympics happened in 1980 and 1984. The Cold War opponents missed each other's Games. 65 nations refused to compete at the Moscow Olympics in 1980 because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Soviet Union and 14 of its Eastern Bloc partners (except Romania) countered by missing the Los Angeles Olympics of 1984. The countries stated that they could not guarantee the safety of their athletes. Soviet officials defended their decision to withdraw from the Games by saying that \"chauvinistic sentiments and an anti-Soviet hysteria are being whipped up in the United States\".\nPolitics.\nThe Olympic Games have been used as a platform to promote political ideologies almost from its inception. Nazi Germany wished to portray the Nationalist Socialist Party as benevolent and peace-loving when they hosted the 1936 Games. The Games were also intended to show the superiority of the Aryan (white) race. This goal was not met due in part to the achievements of athletes such as Jesse Owens, who won four gold medals at this Olympics.\nIndividual athletes have also used the Olympic stage to promote their own political agenda. At the 1968 Summer Olympics, in Mexico City, two American track and field athletes, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, who finished first and third in the 200meter sprint race, performed the Black Power salute on the podium. The runner up Peter Norman wore an Olympic Project for Human Rights badge in support of Smith and Carlos. IOC President Avery Brundage then told the United States, to either send the two athletes home or withdraw the track and field team. The United States chose to send the pair home.\nUse of performance enhancing drugs.\nIn the early 20th century, many Olympic athletes began using drugs to improve their athletic abilities. For example, the winner of the marathon at the 1904 Games, Thomas J. Hicks, was given strychnine and brandy by his coach. The only Olympic death linked to doping happened at the Rome Games of 1960. During the cycling road race, Danish cyclist Knud Enemark Jensen fell from his bicycle and later died. A coroner's inquiry found that he was under the influence of amphetamines. By the mid-1960s, sports federations were starting to ban the use of performance-enhancing drugs. The IOC did likewise in 1967. The IOC created the World Anti-Doping Agency in 1999. The IOC-established drug testing regimen (now known as the Olympic Standard) has set the worldwide benchmark that other sporting federations around the world attempt to emulate. The first Olympic athlete to test positive for the use of performance-enhancing drugs was Hans-Gunnar Liljenwall, a Swedish pentathlete at the 1968 Summer Olympics, who lost his bronze medal for alcohol use.\nViolence.\nThe Olympics have not brought lasting peace to the world, even during the Games. Three Olympic Games were not held due to war. The 1916 Games were cancelled because of World War I, and the summer and winter games of 1940 and 1944 were cancelled because of World War II. Terrorism has also threatened the Olympic Games. In 1972, when the Summer Games were held in Munich, West Germany, eleven members of the Israeli Olympic team were taken hostage by the terrorist group Black September. This event is now known as the Munich massacre. The terrorists killed two of the athletes soon after they had taken them hostage and killed the other nine during a failed rescue attempt. A German police officer and 5 terrorists also died. During the Summer Olympics in 1996 in Atlanta, a bomb was detonated at the Centennial Olympic Park, which killed 2 and injured 111 others. Eric Robert Rudolph is currently serving a life sentence for the bombing.\nHost nations and cities.\nThe host city for an Olympic Games is chosen seven years ahead of the event. The process of selection is carried out in two phases that span a two-year period. The process starts when a city wanting to host the games applies to its country's Olympic group. If more than one city from the same country gives a proposal to its NOC, the national group chooses which city will run for host. The first step once the deadline passes (To tell the IOC that you want to hold the Games), is to ask the cities to complete a questionnaire which covers many key points in the organization of the Olympic Games. The evaluation of the filled questionnaires by a group provides the IOC with an idea of each cities project and their potential to host the Games. On the basis of this evaluation, the IOC chooses the applicants that will proceed to the candidature stage.\nOnce the candidate cities are chosen, they must give to the IOC a bigger presentation of their project as part of a candidature file. Each city is analyzed by an evaluation group. This group will also visit the cities. The group give a report on its findings one month prior to the IOC's final decision. During the interview process the candidate city must also guarantee that it can fund the Games. The IOC members gathered in the meeting have the final vote on the host city.\nBy 2016, the Olympic Games will have been hosted by 44 cities in 23 countries. The United States has hosted four Summer and four Winter Olympics, more than any other nation. Among Summer Olympics host nations, the United Kingdom has been the host of three Games, and hosted its third Olympics in 2012 in London. Germany, Australia, France, and Greece are the other nations to have hosted the Summer Olympics twice. Among host cities, only Los Angeles, Paris, Athens and London have played host to the Olympic Games more than once, with each holding that honor twice. With the 2012 Games that took place in London, the British capital holds the distinction of hosting the modern Olympics Games three times, more than any other city. Paris will be the second city to host the modern Olympics Games three times in 2024, while Los Angeles will be the third city in 2028.\nIn the Winter Olympics, France has hosted three Games, while Switzerland, Austria, Norway, Japan, and Italy have hosted twice. The most recent Games were held in Pyeongchang, South Korea's first Winter Olympics and second overall. The next Winter Games will be in Beijing, China in 2022, which will be the first time this nation has hosted.\nAnd Youth Olympic Games in a separate list."}
{"id": "5291", "revid": "1127964", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5291", "title": "Iron Age", "text": "The Iron Age is the period after the Bronze Age. Iron production took place in Anatolia at least as early as 12,000 BC, with some evidence pointing to even earlier dates.\nIn the Mesopotamian states of Sumer, Akkad and Assyria, the use of iron reaches far back, to perhaps to 30,000 BC. One of the earliest smelted iron artifacts known was a dagger with an iron blade found in a Hattic tomb in Anatolia, dating from 2500 BC. The widespread use of iron weapons which replaced bronze weapons rapidly disseminated throughout the Near East (North Africa, southwest Asia) by the beginning of the 1st millennium BC.\nBefore this time, people used bronze or flint tools, and pottery. They farmed, and lived in communities. Most of Europe, Africa and Asia reached the Iron Age by 50,000 BC. It is a period of prehistory because, though iron and steel continue to be important even today, the \"Iron Age\" is defined as ending when people began to write their history.\nIron is easy to find, but hard to make into tools. It melts at a higher temperature than bronze. When blacksmiths learned how to make iron tools, they were able to make many of them. With more and better tools, people could do more. For example, more people could own a metal plough. They could farm their fields better and grow more crops. Some people invented coins to help buy and sell their crops and their iron tools. \nBronze weapons and armor were no match for those made of iron, so many peoples who did not have iron were conquered by those who did. Soldiers used iron shields and helmets in battle."}
{"id": "5299", "revid": "1251", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5299", "title": "Non-native English speakers on English Wikipedia", "text": ""}
{"id": "5300", "revid": "1013278", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5300", "title": "Entertainment", "text": "Entertainment is something that gives pleasure, or distracts a person from daily life, like a sport or game that excites people and keeps their attention. Some entertainment, like horror movies, can also make people feel sad or scared. Other entertainment, like comedy shows, are funny.\nEntertainment can help reduce stress.\nEntertainments is a form of activity that holds the attention and interest of an audience, or gives pleasure and delight. it can be an idea or an activity or even a task. "}
{"id": "5301", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5301", "title": "Open Site", "text": "Open Site is a free internet encyclopedia created by many editors. Anyone can apply to become an editor or donate content.\nCategories.\nAt Open Site all the content is separated into categories. There are eleven main categories which each have many subcategories. These are the main categories:\nLanguages.\nOpen Site claims to have encyclopedias in many languages e.g. Romanian, but there are very few articles.\nChildrens' Encyclopedia.\nOpen Site started an encyclopedia for children in August 2004. The writing and pictures on the children's' encyclopedia are simpler and easier to understand than other encyclopedias, like this one. The encyclopedia contains tools and facts as well as articles."}
{"id": "5310", "revid": "1110633", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5310", "title": "Coca-Cola", "text": "Coca-Cola, is a carbonated, sweetened soft drink and is the world's best-selling drink. A popular nickname for Coca-Cola is Coke. The Coca-Cola Company claims that the beverage is sold in more than 200 countries. The company's headquarters are in Atlanta, Georgia. Coca-Cola's main rival is Pepsi because of the similar taste of their main product. Coca-Cola has 7 cubes of sugar, whereas Pepsi has 8 cubes of sugar. The Coca-Cola Company is proud to have a long history of sponsoring major events, organizations and projects around the world. Among their most well known sponsorships are American Idol, Apple iTunes, BET Network, NASCAR, NBA, NCAAmarvel and the Olympic Games. After their products were put back on sale in Myanmar in 2012, the only countries that Coca-Cola can not be bought officially are Cuba and North Korea, due to trade bans with the US.\nHistory.\nCoca-Cola was first made in the 1800s by John Pemberton. The first sales were at Jacob's Pharmacy in Atlanta, Georgia, on May 8, 1886. They sold it there for five cents a glass, it was very strong tasting because they did not mix it with water. Coca-Cola was first made the way it is now in Columbus, Georgia. It was called Pemberton's French Wine Coca at first, and was sold as a medicine to help cure colds and give people more energy. The drink used to be sold at soda fountains in the United States. It was also created to stop addictions to morphine.\nCoca-Cola was first sold in bottles in Atlanta on March 12, 1894 with actual cocaine content. It was first sold in cans in 1955. During the first year, sales were about only nine drinks per day. Dr. Pemberton did not think he could make a lot of money with the drink he invented, so he sold parts of his business to different people. Just before he died in 1888, he sold the rest of his Coca-Cola business to Asa G. Candler. Mr. Candler, together with some other businessmen, started the Coca-Cola Company.\nCandler became mayor of Atlanta and gave most of his shares of Coca-Cola to his children. In 1919 the family sold control of Coca-Cola to Ernest Woodruff.\nIn 1923 Woodruff's son Robert Winship Woodruff became president of Coca-Cola,replacing Asa Candler's son Charles Howard Candler.\nHow Coca-Cola was named.\nThe drink is called \"Coca-Cola\" because of the coca leaf and kola fruits that were used to add flavor. Dr. Pemberton's partner and bookkeeper, Frank Robinson, suggested the name \"Coca-Cola\" because he thought using the letter C twice would look better than if they used a K in the word \"Cola\". He then wrote down the name to use as a logo that is now very famous. The recipe was altered after a short while, after the cocaine/coca leaf reportedly caused cases of hallucinations. Coca has not been used in the formula since 1903.\nCoca-Cola's advertising.\nCoca-Cola was the first ever sponsor of the Olympic Games. This was for the 1928 Olympic Games in Amsterdam.\nOther products.\nThe company sells many other products, including other sorts of Coca-Cola, such as Diet Coke (1981), Cherry Coke (1985), Diet Cherry Coke (1986), Diet/Coke with Lemon (2001), Diet Vanilla Coke (2002), Diet/ Coke with Lime (2004), Coke Zero (2006), Coca-Cola with Orange (2007), Diet Coke Citrus Zest (2007). Based on Interbrand's best global brand 2011, Coca-Cola was the world's most valuable brand."}
{"id": "5311", "revid": "1078549", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5311", "title": "Sulfur", "text": "Sulfur (or sulphur) is a chemical element. The symbol for sulfur is S, and its atomic number is 16.\nProperties.\nSulfur is a yellow solid that is a nonmetal. It is fragile (easily broken) and crystalline. It burns easily, releasing toxic fumes of sulfur dioxide. It has a very faint odor. If it is melted and cooled very quickly, it makes a rubbery form of sulfur that is called \"plastic sulfur\". It gradually turns back into the yellow brittle form. It does not dissolve in water. The smell normally known as \"sulfur\" comes from hydrogen sulfide and similar chemicals. These sulfides are produced when things decay without air.\nChemical compounds.\nSulfur compounds are chemical compounds containing sulfur ions. Sulfur comes in several forms: oxidation states of -2 (hydrogen sulfide), +4 (sulfur dioxide, sulfites) and +6 (sulfuric acid, sulfates) are most common, although there are other oxidation states.\nSulfur acids.\nMixture of sulfur oxides and water\nSulfides.\nSalts of hydrogen sulfide\nSulfites.\nSalts of sulfurous acid\nSulfates and bisulfates.\nSalts of sulfuric acid\nOccurrence and preparation.\nSulfur can be found in the earth near volcanoes. Many minerals contain sulfur ions. Coal contains sulfur ions which are released when it burns. Hydrogen sulfide and sulfur dioxide are some sulfur compounds that are released when coal burns. They are reacted to make sulfur. Sulfur in the ground in melted, then forced up through pipes by compressed (squeezed) air.\nUses.\nSulfur is commonly used in gunpowder, medicine, and matches. Matches release sulfur dioxide when they burn, giving them their smell. Sulfur is an essential component to living cells. Many proteins contain sulfur. It is also used as a pesticide on organic farms.\nEtymology.\nPowder sulfur is said to be left after an occurrence of a supernatural being.\nToxicity and safety.\nSulfur is not toxic, but the chemical compounds formed when sulfur burns can be very toxic. Sulfuric acid, for example, can make paper turn black!\nHistory.\nThe ancient name for sulfur is \"brimstone\". Sulfur was used in fumigation (making fumes) and medicine in ancient Greece. In 1777, Antoine Lavosier convinced the scientific community that sulfur was an element."}
{"id": "5312", "revid": "40284", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5312", "title": "Sulphur", "text": ""}
{"id": "5313", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5313", "title": "Aluminium", "text": "Aluminium (in American and Canadian English also: aluminum) is a chemical element. The symbol for aluminium is Al, and its atomic number is 13. Aluminium is the most abundant metal. It is a mononuclidic element.\nHistory.\nPeople have tried to produce aluminium since 1760. The first successful attempt, finished in 1824 by Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian \u00d8rsted. He reacted anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium amalgam, yielding a lump of metal looking similar to tin. He presented his results and showed a sample of the new metal in 1825. In 1827, German chemist Friedrich W\u00f6hler repeated \u00d8rsted's experiments but did not identify any aluminium. (The reason for this inconsistency was only discovered in 1921.) He conducted a similar experiment in the same year by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium and produced a powder of aluminium. In 1845, he was able to produce small pieces of the metal and described some physical properties of this metal. For many years thereafter, W\u00f6hler was credited as personewho discovered of aluminium.\nProperties.\nAluminium is a very good conductor of electricity and heat. It is light and strong. It can be hammered into sheets (malleable) or pulled out into wires (ductile). It is a highly reactive metal, although it is corrosion resistant.\nA fresh film of aluminium is a good reflector of visible light and an excellent reflector of medium and far infrared radiation.\nAluminium prevents corrosion by forming a small, thin layer of aluminium oxide on its surface. This layer protects the metal by preventing oxygen from reaching it. Corrosion can not occur without oxygen. Because of this thin layer, the reactivity of aluminium is not seen. As a powder it burns hot. Uses include fireworks displays and rocket fuel.\nOccurrence and preparation.\nPure aluminium is made from bauxite, a kind of rock that has aluminium oxide and many impurities. The bauxite is crushed and reacted with sodium hydroxide. The aluminium oxide dissolves. Then the aluminium oxide is dissolved in liquid cryolite, a rare mineral. Cryolite is normally produced artificially though. The aluminium oxide is electrolyzed to make aluminium and oxygen. The largest producer of aluminium is China. China produces about 31,873 thousand tonnes of aluminium.\nAluminium was once considered a precious metal that was even more valuable than gold. This is no longer true because, as technology improved, it became cheaper and easier to make pure metal.\nIn space.\nIt is the 12th most abundant of all elements. It is the 3rd most abundant among the elements that have odd atomic numbers. The only stable isotope of aluminium is aluminium-27. It is the 18th most abundant nucleus in the Universe. It is created after fusion of carbon in massive stars that will later become Type II supernovae: this fusion creates magnesium-26, which, when capturing free protons and neutrons becomes aluminium. Essentially all aluminium now in existence is aluminium-27; aluminium-26 was there in the early Solar System but is now extinct. The trace quantities of aluminium-26 that do exist are the most common gamma ray emitter in the interstellar gas.\nOn Earth.\nOverall, the Earth is about 1.59% aluminium by mass. In the Earth's crust, aluminium is the most abundant metallic element by mass (8.23%). It is also the third most abundant of all elements in the Earth's crust. A lot of silicates in the Earth's crust contain aluminium. But, the Earth's mantle is only 2.38% aluminium by mass. Aluminium also occurs in seawater at a concentration of 2 \u03bcg/kg.\nFeldspars, the most common group of minerals in the Earth's crust, are aluminosilicates. Aluminium also occurs in the minerals beryl, cryolite, garnet, spinel, and turquoise. Native aluminium has been reported in cold seeps in the northeastern continental slope of the South China Sea.\nCompounds.\nAluminium forms chemical compounds in the +3 oxidation state. They are generally unreactive. Aluminium chloride and aluminium oxide examples. Very rarely are compounds in the +1 or +2 oxidation state.\nUses.\nMany things are made of aluminium. Much of it is used in overhead power lines. It is also widely used in window frames and aircraft bodies. It is found at home as kitchenware, soft drink cans, and cooking foil. Aluminium is also used to coat car headlamps and compact discs. It is used in electrical transmission lines because of its light weight. It can be deposited on the surface of glass to make mirrors, where a thin layer of aluminum oxide quickly forms that acts as a protective coating. Aluminum oxide is also used to make synthetic rubies and sapphires for lasers. Aluminum can now be produced from clay, but the process is not economically feasible at today.\nPure aluminium is very soft, so a harder metal is almost always added. The harder metal is usually copper. Copper/aluminium alloys are to make ships, because the aluminium prevents corrosion, and the copper prevents barnacles.\nAluminium compounds are used in deodorants, water processing plants, food additives, and antacids. Lithium aluminium hydride is a really strong reducing agent used in organic chemistry.\nAluminium sulfate is used in water treatment. It is also used as a mordant in dyeing, in pickling seeds, deodorizing of mineral oils, in leather tanning, and in production of other aluminium compounds.\nAnhydrous aluminium chloride is used as a catalyst in chemical and petrochemical industries, the dyeing industry, and in synthesis of many inorganic and organic compounds.\nAluminium hydroxychlorides are used in purifying water, in the paper industry, and as \ufffc\ufffcantiperspirants\ufffc. Sodium aluminate is used in treating water and as an accelerator for drying of cement. \nAluminium acetate in solution is used as an astringent.\nAluminium phosphate is used to make glass, ceramic, pulp and paper products, cosmetics, paints, varnishes. Aluminium hydroxide is used as an antacid, and mordant. It is used also in water purification, the manufacture of glass and ceramics, and in the waterproofing of fabrics.\nAluminium is used in automobiles, trucks, railway cars, marine vessels, bicycles, spacecraft. Aluminium is used in making doors, siding, building wire, sheathing, roofing and other building materials.\nRecycling.\nSince aluminium needs to be made by electrolysis, it requires a very large amount of electrical power. Recycling aluminium would be much cheaper. That's why recycling plants were opened. The cost of recycling aluminium is much less than the cost of making it from bauxite.\nRecycling involves melting the scrap. This is a process that only needs 5% of the energy used to produce aluminium from ore. But, 15% of the input material part is lost as dross (ash-like oxide). An aluminium stack melter makes a lot less dross, about 1%.\nWhite dross from primary aluminium production and from secondary recycling processes still contains useful amounts of aluminium that can be extracted industrially. The process produces aluminium billets, together with a very complex waste. This waste is difficult to manage. It reacts with water, releasing a mixture of gases (including, hydrogen, acetylene, and ammonia), which ignites on contact with air. Even with these difficulties, the waste is used as a filler in asphalt and concrete.\nToxicity.\nAluminium is not used in the human body, although it is very common. People debate whether its use in deodorants and water treatment is healthy. Aluminium ions slow down plant growth in acidic soils. Aluminium may be a factor in Alzheimer's disease (a disease when the brain stops working and the patient is confused). But the Alzheimer's Society says overwhelming medical and scientific opinion is that studies have not convincingly demonstrated a causal relationship between aluminium and Alzheimer's disease.\nIn most people, aluminium is not as toxic as heavy metals. Aluminium is classified as a non-carcinogen by United States Department of Health and Human Services. There is little proof that normal exposure to aluminium is a risk to healthy adult. There is proof of no toxicity if it is taken in amounts not greater than 40 mg/day per kg of body mass. Most aluminium taken will leave the body in feces. Most of the small part that enters the blood, will be excreted via urine.\nAluminium rarely causes vitamin D-resistant osteomalacia, erythropoietin-resistant microcytic anemia, and central nervous system changes. People with kidney insufficiency are at a risk the most. Chronic ingestion of hydrated aluminium silicates may result in aluminium binding to the things in the intestines. It also increases the removal of other metals, like iron or zinc. Really high doses (&gt;50 g/day) can cause anemia.\nA small percentage of people have contact allergies to aluminium and experience itchy red rashes, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, poor memory, insomnia, depression, asthma, irritable bowel syndrome, or other symptoms when touching products containing aluminium.\nExposure to powdered aluminium or aluminium welding fumes can cause pulmonary fibrosis. Fine aluminium powder can also explode.\nWays of exposure.\nFood is the main source of aluminium. Drinking water has more aluminium than solid foods. Aluminium in food may be absorbed more than aluminium from water. Major sources of human exposure by mouth to aluminium include food (because of its use in food additives, food and beverage packaging, and cooking utensils), drinking water (because of its use in water treatment), and medicines that have aluminium in it. Very high exposure of aluminium are mostly limited to miners, aluminium production workers, and dialysis patients.\nTaking of antacids, antiperspirants, vaccines, and cosmetics give possible ways of exposure. Eating acidic foods or liquids with aluminium increases aluminium absorption. Maltol has been shown to increase the build up of aluminium in nerve and bone tissues.\nTreatment.\nIn case of suspected sudden consumption of a large amount of aluminium, the only treatment is deferoxamine mesylate. It may be given to help remove aluminium from the body by chelation. But, this should be applied with caution as it not only reduce aluminium in the body, but can also reduce those of other metals such as copper or iron.\nEnvironmental effects.\nHigh levels of aluminium occur near mining sites. Small amounts of aluminium are released to the environment at the coal-fired power plants or incinerators. Aluminium in the air is washed out by the rain or normally settles down. But, small particles of aluminium remain in the air for a long time.\nAcid rain is the main natural factor to move aluminium from natural sources. It is also the main reason for the effects of aluminium on the environment. The main factor for the presence of aluminium in salt and freshwater are the industrial processes that also release aluminium into air.\nIn water, aluminium acts as a toxi\u0441 agent on animals that with gills like fish by causing loss of plasma- and hemolymph ions leading to osmoregulatory failure.\nAluminium is one of the primary factors that reduce the growth of plants on acidic soils. In acid soils the concentration of toxic Al3+ cations increases and disturbs the growth and function of the root. It is generally harmless to plant growth in pH-neutral soils. Wheat has developed a tolerance to aluminium. It releases organic compounds that bind to harmful aluminium cations. Sorghum is thought to have the same method of tolerating aluminium.\nAluminium production has its own problems to the environment on each step of the production process. The major problem is the greenhouse gas. These gases are caused by the electrical consumption of the smelters and the byproducts of processing. The strongest of these gases are perfluorocarbons from the smelting process.\nA Spanish scientific report from 2001 claimed that the fungus \"Geotrichum candidum\" eats the aluminium in compact discs. The better studied bacterium \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" and the fungus \"Cladosporium resinae\" are commonly found in aircraft fuel tanks that use kerosene-based fuels, and laboratory cultures can decompose aluminium. However, these types of bacteria do not eat the aluminium; but rather, the metal is corroded by microbe waste products."}
{"id": "5315", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5315", "title": "Aluminum", "text": ""}
{"id": "5316", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5316", "title": "Drawing", "text": "Drawing is a way of making a picture. Drawings are created by making lines on a surface. Long lines make up the shapes and small lines make the textures. Drawings can be images of real-life or abstract images showing ideas that cannot be seen in the real world.\nA drawing is the art created this way. Examples of things used to mark with are pencils, chalk, charcoal, crayons, pastels, markers, wax colored pencils, pen and ink.\nArtists have been drawing for many centuries. They draw on paper or on other surfaces on which the marks show up.\nDrawing techniques include sketching, shading, cubism and many more.\nBetween 1912 and 1948 art competitions were a part of the Olympics.\nDrawings can be made using many different media. It can be multimedia. "}
{"id": "5324", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5324", "title": "Texas", "text": "Texas (, ), officially the State of Texas, is a state in the South Central Region of the United States. It is the second largest US state by total area (after Alaska) with 268,596 sq mi (695,662 km2) and population (after California) with nearly 29 million people as of 2019. Its largest cities are Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, El Paso, and Austin, the capital city.\nTexas became the 28th state in the United States in 1845. Texas has been controlled by Spain, France, the Confederate States of America, and Mexico. It declared its independence from Mexico in 1836. It was its own country, the Republic of Texas, for 9 years (1836\u20131845). It is called the \"Lone Star State\" and its flag has one star.\nThere are many tourist attractions in Texas. Fort Worth is known for its stockyards. Amarillo is known for the cattle business and stockyards. In Dallas, industrial technology companies including Texas Instruments and EDS have their home offices. San Antonio has The Alamo. Houston has the Johnson Space Center. Austin has the University of Texas at Austin. Texas A&amp;M University in College Station, Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Baylor University in Waco and the University of North Texas in Denton are other important universities in the state.\nName.\nThe state's name derives from t\u00e1yshay, a word in the Caddoan language of the Hasinai (a Native American tribe), which means \"allies\" or \"friends.\"\nHistory.\nTexas was first explored in 1528 by Spanish explorers on accident (they were shipwrecked on the coast). It did not become a colony until 1685, when France claimed it. In response, Spain started a rival colony in 1691 by setting up a religious outpost in the eastern part of Texas. Spain did not come back to Texas until 1716 to protect its colonies in the west from French forces. Two years later, San Antonio was founded.\nThe pressure between the Spaniards and Native Americans in East Texas stopped many settlers from coming to Texas. To stop the violence and the increasing Native American raids, Spain called a truce between many tribes in 1745 and 1789.\nTensions rose in Texas after the United States bought a large amount of nearby land from France in 1803. This was the Louisiana Purchase. People began wondering whether Spain or the United States could claim Texas.\nMexico won the Mexican War of Independence in 1821. Mexico, including Texas, was free from the Spanish Empire. Americans and other settlers came into Texas when Mexico allowed non-Spanish settlers to settle here. After many settlers came to Texas, Mexico started taxing non-citizens. This outraged many settlers. Many were already angry because Mexico banned slavery.\nPolitics in Mexico became violent and several Mexican States declared independence. On March 2, 1836, Texas declared independence from Mexico and soon they were at war. Texas won, but Mexico refused to recognize Texas as an independent sovereign Republic. Texas soon requested entry to the United States. Years later, in 1845, the US added Texas as a state, and Mexico broke off diplomatic relations. Mexico resisted offers by the U.S. to buy land extending from Texas to the Pacific Ocean. In 1846, a dispute over the border between Texas and Mexico resulted in armed conflict, and the Mexican-American War began. The United States won the war, and by the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, in 1848 won lands that later formed the states of California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico, southwestern Colorado, and southwestern Wyoming. Mexico received 15 million dollars and gave up its claims to Texas.\nAfter Abraham Lincoln was elected President of the United States, Texas joined the newly formed Confederate States of America in 1861 and fought in the American Civil War in an attempt to become independent from the United States. The Confederates lost to the Union (the United States) in 1865. Texas was restored to full representation in Congress on March 30, 1870.\nOn January 10, 1901, oil was found in Texas, leading to the founding of a richer economy. During a time when the economy was poor, many people left Texas. Texas did not regain the population it had lost until the 1950s and 60s. In recent years, Texas has become a hub for technology and computers.\nGeography.\nTexas is the second biggest state in the Union (after Alaska) and is bigger than every European country except Russia. It has mountains, forests, deserts, plains, and coasts. The largest river in Texas is the Rio Grande, which forms the border between Mexico and the United States throughout south Texas. The highest mountain in Texas is Guadalupe Peak.\nMost of Texas is in Central Time, but El Paso in Western Texas is in Mountain Time.\nEconomy.\nTexas has the second largest economy in the United States after the economy of California. It had a gross state product of US$1.887 trillion in 2019. Texas was home to six of the top 50 companies on the Fortune 500 list in 2015 (third most after New York and California). In 2017, Texas grossed more than US$264.5 billion a year in exports\u2014more than the exports of California (US$172 billion) and New York (US$77.9 billion) combined. As a sovereign country, in 2016, Texas would be the 10th largest economy in the world by gross domestic product (GDP), ahead of South Korea and Canada and behind Brazil."}
{"id": "5354", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5354", "title": "Prussia", "text": "Prussia (; , , Old Prussian: \"Pr\u016bsa\" or \"Pr\u016bsija\") was a series of countries. Originally it was a historically prominent German state that originated in 1525. Mostly, the name is used for the Kingdom of Prussia, which was in northern Europe. It was part of Germany for a while, and it included land in Poland, France, and Lithuania. The name \"Prussian\" has had a lot of different meanings in the past and now:\nIn 1934, Germany stopped using the name Prussia for that area, and in 1947 the Allies abolished the state of Prussia and divided its territory among themselves and the new States of Germany. Today, the name is only for historical, geographical, or cultural use.\nThe name Prussia comes from the Borussi or Prussi people who lived in the Baltic region and spoke the Old Prussian language. Ducal Prussia was a fiefdom of the Kingdom of Poland until 1660, and Royal Prussia was part of Poland until 1772. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, most German-speaking Prussians started thinking of themselves as part of the German nation. They thought the Prussian way of life was very important: \nFrom the late 18th century, Prussia had a lot of power in northern Germany and throughout central Europe; it was the strongest in politics and economics, and it had the most people. After Chancellor Otto von Bismarck dissolved the German Confederation, Prussia annexed almost all of northern Germany. In 1871, after the Franco-Prussian War, von Bismarck created the German Empire, and Prussia was the center of the empire, with the Kings of Prussia being the Emperors of Germany.\nGeography.\nPrussia's borders have changed over time. It has not always been the exact same place. Mostly, Prussia was a small part of what is today northern Poland. After a small number of Prussian people moved there to live, Germans came to live there too. In 1934, Prussia's borders were with France, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Lithuania. Some parts of Prussia are in eastern Poland. Before 1918, a lot of western Poland was also in Prussia. Between 1795 and 1807, Prussia also controlled Warsaw and most of central Poland.\nBefore 1934, these regions were also in Prussia:\nHowever, some regions were never part of Prussia, such as Oldenburg, Mecklenburg, and the Hanse city-states.\nNortheast Germany was Protestant, so Prussians were mostly Protestant. But there were a lot of Catholic people in the Rhineland, East Prussia, Posen, Silesia, West Prussia, and Ermland. The states of south Germany (especially Austria and Bavaria) were Catholic, so they did not want Prussians to rule them. Prussia was mostly German, but in the late 18th century, the new Polish areas had a lot of Polish people too. In 1918, these Polish areas were given to Poland, and in 1945, Pomerania and East Prussia were given to Poland. Northern East Prussia, specifically Kaliningrad, was given to Russia.\nHistory.\nIn 1226, Polish Prince Conrad of Mazovia (Mazovia is a place in Northern Poland) asked the Teutonic Knights from Transylvania to come to Mazovia. He wanted them to fight the Prussian tribes on his borders. They fought for more than 100 years. Then they created a new state. After some time, this state controlled most of today's Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and parts of northern Poland. In 1466, the Knights were under the King of Poland and Lithuania. In 1525, the leader of the Knights became a Protestant. He made part of the Knights' land into the Duchy of Prussia, which was then part of the Kingdom of Poland. \nAt that time, the Duchy of Prussia was only the area east of the place where the Vistula River enters the sea. In 1618, the new Duke of Prussia was the Elector John Sigismund of Brandenburg. He was also Margrave of Brandenburg. Brandenburg was ruled by the Hohenzollern family. The Duchy of Prussia was important to the Hohenzollern family because it was not part of the Holy Roman Empire. The name for the new state was \"Brandenburg-Prussia\". In the middle of the state was Polish land, but Brandenburg-Prussia was moving away from Poland. Under Frederick William, who was called \"the Great Elector,\" Prussia took some new land in Magdeburg and areas west of the Rhine.\nKingdom of Prussia.\nIn 1701, the Holy Roman Emperor and Polish King allowed Brandenburg-Prussia to call itself \"Kingdom of Prussia\" with Frederick I (\"the Great\") as its king. Under Frederick II, Prussia waged war against Austria and took Silesia. The wars ended in 1763; Prussia was then the most powerful state in eastern Germany. Other parts of Germany, including Pomerania, went to Prussia because of marriage or death.\nDuring this time, the Prussian army got bigger, and so did the administration system. Until 1945, these were at the most important parts of the German state. Between 1772 and 1795, Prussia, Russia and Austria divided Poland into parts (the Partitions of Poland). Prussia controlled land in the far east, including the city of Warsaw. \nFrederick William II had Prussia join the war with France in 1792. He lost at Valmy and gave his western land to France. Frederick William III started a new war, but lost at Jena. He gave more land to France at the Treaty of Tilsit.\nIn 1813, Prussia again started war with Napoleonic France. In 1815, Prussia won back the land it lost in earlier wars and also all the Rhineland and Westphalia and some other land. This land in the west was very important, especially the Ruhr valley. It was the new center of Germany's industrialization and the home of the weapons industry. After the Napoleonic Wars, Prussia was the strongest power in Germany and more powerful than Austria. \nIn the early 19th century, there were two political groups in Germany. The liberals wanted a democratic system with one strong central government. The conservatives wanted Germany to be made of a group of independent, weak states . In 1848, revolution came to Europe. Frederick William IV was worried. He allowed a National Assembly and a constitution. The new Frankfurt Parliament wanted to give Frederick William the crown of all Germany, but he did not want it. He said that revolutionaries could not name kings. Now Prussia had a semi-democratic constitution, but really the nobility with land (the Junkers) had the power, especially in the east.\nImperial Prussia.\nIn 1862, Prussian King Wilhelm I appointed Otto von Bismarck as the prime minister of Prussia. Bismarck wanted the liberals and the conservatives to lose. He wanted to create a strong, united Germany, but he wanted to do so under the Junker, not under the western German liberals. So, he started three wars:\nThis was Prussia's high moment. The economic and political future looked good. But after 99 days, in 1888, the state had a new leader, Kaiser Wilhelm II. He fired Bismarck, who lost his job in 1890, and Wilhelm II started a new foreign policy. He made the army bigger, and the navy much bigger, and he took risks. This is part of why Germany entered World War I. When the Germans and their allies lost that war, the Prussian Junkers lost power. The Prussian king and the other German kings had to leave. Germany became the Weimar Republic. In 1919, the Treaty of Versailles re-created the Polish state, and Prussia had to give up much of its land. The Polish Corridor was split between East Prussia and Germany.\nThe end of Prussia.\nAt the end of World War I, the Treaty of Versailles separated West Prussia from the rest of Germany to make the Free City of Danzig and Polish Corridor, so Poland would have access to the ocean instead of being landlocked. Some people also wanted to break Prussia into smaller states, but this did not happen. Prussia became the \"Prussian Free State\" \"(Freistaat Preu\u00dfen),\" the largest state in the Weimar Republic. The Prussian Free State made up more than 60% of all the land in the Weimar Republic. The Prussian Free State contained the industrial Ruhr area the city of Berlin, so many people with left-leaning political ideas lived there. The Social Democrats and the Catholic Centre had power for most of the 1920s. \nIn 1932, Germany's conservative Chancellor Franz von Papen took control of Prussia, ending the state's democratic constitution. It was the end of German democracy too. In 1933, Hermann G\u00f6ring became Interior Minister of Prussia; he was now very strong. In 1934, the Nazis took the German states' power. \nIn 1945, the Soviet Union's army captured all of eastern and central Germany (and Berlin). Poland took everything east of the Oder-Neisse line, e.g. Silesia, Pomerania, eastern Brandenburg, and East Prussia. The Soviet Union took the northern third of East Prussia, including K\u00f6nigsberg, now Kaliningrad. About ten million Germans had to run away from these areas. Polish and Russian people moved in in their place. Because of this, and because the Communists took control of land in the GDR, also called East Germany, the Junker and Prussia were finished. \nIn 1947, the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union formally agreed the end of Prussia. In the Soviet Zone (which was called the GDR starting in 1949), which included Prussian lands, were now the states of Brandenburg and Saxony-Anhalt. The Prussian parts of Pomerania went to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. In 1952, the GDR government stopped using states and used districts instead. In 1990, the end of the GDR, the states returned. In the West, (called the Federal Republic of Germany or West Germany starting in 1949), the Prussian lands went to North Rhine-Westphalia, Lower Saxony, Hesse, Rhineland-Palatinate and Schleswig-Holstein. Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg took the Hohenzollern land.\nThe idea of Prussia is not completely dead in Germany. Some people want to put together the states of Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, and Berlin and call them Prussia. But German politicians are not interested in the idea. The constitution of Berlin allows for Berlin and Brandenburg to become one state, but the people of Berlin voted against doing this on May 5, 1996."}
{"id": "5361", "revid": "1076232", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5361", "title": "Apocrypha", "text": "The Apocrypha are religious texts that are in some versions of the Catholic Bible. Other versions omit them. The word comes from Ancient Greek \"\" (apokrypha). Apocrypha means \"those that were hidden\". Generally, the term is applied to writings that were not part of the canon. There are several reasons why these texts were not included in the canon. The texts might only have been known to few people, or they might have been left out because their content does not fit well into that of the other books of the Bible. Some of the apocrypha were written at a later date, and were therefore not included. \nThe Authorized King James Version called these books \u2018Apocrypha\u2019. It separated them, because the Bible said so in 2 Esdras 14:46, \"But keep the seventy last, that thou mayest deliver them only to such as be wise among the people: For in them is the spring of understanding, the fountain of wisdom, and the stream of knowledge.\"\nRoman Catholic Bibles have these books in the Old Testament. They do not call them Apocrypha. They call them deuterocanonical, which means that they belong to the second canon. Canon just means an official list of literary works accepted as representing a field. The first list is of books first written in Hebrew. This second list is of books first written in Greek.\nSome say.\nThese books were kept in Catholic Bibles because it is believed that the Bible which Jesus read was a Bible that included the books of the \"Apocrypha,\" the deuterocanonical books. It is known that the most popular Bible at the time of Jesus was the Greek Septuagint version - which includes these extra books. That is why early Church fathers quoted from Bibles including these books.\nOthers say.\nChristians disagree about the \u2018Apocrypha\u2019. Others point out that the \u2018Apocrypha\u2019 was in every Christian Bible until 1828.\nIn 1828 these books were taken out of some Bibles. The translators of the King James Bible said that these books were written to prepare the people for Jesus, in the same way as John the Baptist did. They said that the apostles used these books. And modern day members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (sometimes referred to as Mormons) also have hints in the Book of Mormon. \nThere is no question that these books have always been part of the Bible in Oriental Orthodox Churches, so they were definitely not added in the 1500s. Around the year 80 AD, the Jewish Council (Sanhedrin) decided to cut the books from the Hebrew Bible, but they stayed in the Christian Bible. Then soon after Christianity became the only religion of Roman Empire in the 4th century, the Romans decided to cut out all of the same books that the Sanhedrin had cut out, and they moved some of them to the \"apocrypha\".\nTexts of the Apocrypha.\nBooks of the Apocrypha (they may not be in order):\nNote: Other candidates for Apocryphal scriptures include supposedly lost portions of Esther and Sirach.\nThere are also Apocrypha candidates for the New Testament:"}
{"id": "5392", "revid": "7858220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5392", "title": "Sodium", "text": "Sodium (symbol Na, from the Latin name \"natrium\") is the chemical element number 11 in the periodic table of elements. It follows that its nucleus includes 11 protons, and 11 electrons orbit around it (according to the simplified model known as \"Niels Bohr atom\"). Even if many isotopes can be artificially made, all decay in a short time. As a result, all sodium found in nature (mainly in sea water) has the composition 11Na23, meaning that the nucleus includes 12 neutrons. The atomic mass of sodium is 22.9898; if it is rounded, it would be 23.\nProperties.\nSodium is a light, silver-coloured metal. Sodium is so soft that it can be easily cut with a knife. When it is cut, the surface will become white over time. This is because it reacts with air to form sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate. Sodium is a little lighter than water; when it reacts with water it floats and reacts. This reaction is very fast. Hydrogen and sodium hydroxide are produced and lots of heat is created which usually causes the hydrogen to ignite. Since sodium melts at a low temperature, it melts when it reacts with water. It has one valence electron which is removed easily, making it highly reactive. \nCompared with other alkali metals (metals in the first column of the periodic table), sodium is usually less reactive than potassium and more reactive than lithium.\nChemical compounds.\nThese are chemical compounds that contain sodium ions. Sodium only exists in 1 oxidation state: +1.\nDiscovery and name.\nSodium was discovered by Sir Humphrey Davy, an English scientist, back in 1807. He made it by the electrolysis of sodium hydroxide. It is named after soda, a name for sodium hydroxide or sodium carbonate.\nUse as element.\nIt is used in the preparation of organic compounds. It is also used in the street lights that are orange, and ultra violet lights.\nUse as compounds.\nSodium compounds are used in soaps, toothpaste, baking and antiacids.\nOccurrence and production.\nSodium does not exist as an element in nature; its easily removed valence electron is too reactive. It exists as an ion in chemical compounds. Sodium ions are found in the ocean. It is also found as sodium chloride in the earth's crust, where it is mined.\nSodium is normally made by electrolysis of very hot sodium chloride that was melted.\nUse in organisms.\nSodium ion in the form of sodium chloride is needed in the human body, but large amounts of it cause problems, which is why one should not eat too much salt and other food items with huge sodium amount (such as biscuits with baking soda). Many organisms in the ocean depend on the proper concentration of ions in sea water to live."}
{"id": "5395", "revid": "115351", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5395", "title": "Dice", "text": "Dice are objects used in games when something random needs to be done, such as moving a game piece a random number of places on a board. Most dice are cubes that have the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 on the faces. Dice are sometimes made in other polyhedral shapes than cubes, but the six-sided die (\"die\" is the singular of \"dice\") is the most common. A die is usually rolled by the player\u2019s hand. When adding together opposite sides of typical cubical dice, the sum is always 7.\nSome games are played with two or more dice and some use only one. Some games that use dice are Monopoly, Yahtzee, Risk, and many more. Dice with different numbers of sides, like those used in Dungeons &amp; Dragons, are called polyhedral dice.\nWeights can be put inside a die to make it only land on a certain number once it is rolled. "}
{"id": "5398", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5398", "title": "Matrix (mathematics)", "text": "In mathematics, a matrix (plural: matrices) is a rectangle of numbers, arranged in rows and columns. The rows are each left-to-right (horizontal) lines, and the columns go top-to-bottom (vertical). The top-left cell is at row 1, column 1 \"(see diagram at right)\".\nMatrices are often represented by capital roman letters such as formula_1, formula_2 and formula_3, and there are rules for adding, subtracting and \"multiplying\" matrices together, but the rules are different than for numbers. As an example, the product formula_4 does not always give the same result as formula_5, which is the case for the multiplication of ordinary numbers. A matrix can have more than 2 dimensions, such as a 3D matrix. Also, a matrix can be one-dimensional, as a single row or a single column.\nMany natural sciences use matrices quite a lot. In many universities, courses about matrices (usually called linear algebra) are taught very early, sometimes even in the first year of studies. Matrices are also very common in computer science, engineering, physics, economics, and statistics.\nDefinitions and notations.\nThe horizontal lines in a matrix are called rows and the vertical lines are called columns. A matrix with \"m\" rows and \"n\" columns is called an \"m\"-by-\"n\" matrix (or \"m\"\u00d7\"n\" matrix) and \"m\" and \"n\" are called its dimensions.\nThe places in the matrix where the numbers are is called \"entries\". The entry of a matrix \"A\" that lies in the row number \"i\" and column number \"j\" is called the \"i,j\" entry of \"A\". This is written as \"A\"[\"i,j\"] or \"a\"\"i,j\".\nWe write formula_6 to define an \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix \"A\", with each entry in the matrix called \"a\"\"i,j\" for all 1 \u2264 \"i\" \u2264 \"m\" and 1 \u2264 \"j\" \u2264 \"n\".\nExample.\nThe matrix\nis a 4\u00d73 matrix. This matrix has m=4 rows, and n=3 columns.\nThe element \"A\"[2,3] or \"a\"2,3 is 7.\nOperations.\nAddition.\nThe sum of two matrices is the matrix, which (\"i\",\"j\")-th entry is equal to the sum of the (\"i\",\"j\")-th entries of two matrices:\nThe two matrices have the same dimensions. Here, formula_9 is true (and is true in general for matrices of equal dimensions).\nMultiplication of two matrices.\nThe multiplication of two matrices is a bit more complicated: \nSo with numbers:\nSpecial matrices.\nThere are some matrices that are special.\nSquare matrix.\nA square matrix has the same number of rows as columns, so m=n.\nAn example of a square matrix is \nThis matrix has 3 rows and 3 columns: m=n=3.\nIdentity.\nEvery square dimension set of a matrix has a special counterpart called the \"identity matrix\", represented by the symbol formula_15. The identity matrix has nothing but zeroes except on the main diagonal, where there are all ones. For example:\nis an identity matrix. There is exactly one identity matrix for each square dimension set. An identity matrix is special because when multiplying any matrix by the identity matrix, the result is always the original matrix with no change.\nInverse matrix.\nAn inverse matrix is a matrix that, when multiplied by another matrix, equals the identity matrix. For example:\nformula_18 is the inverse of \nformula_19.\nThe formula for the inverse of a 2x2 matrix, formula_20 is:\nformula_21\nWhere formula_22 is the determinant of the matrix. In a 2x2 matrix, the determinant is equal to:\nformula_23\nOne column matrix.\nA matrix, that has many rows, but only one column, is called a column vector.\nDeterminants.\nThe determinant takes a square matrix and calculates a simple number, a scalar. To understand what this number means, take each column of the matrix and draw it as a vector. The parallelogram drawn by those vectors has an area, which is the determinant. For all 2x2 matrices, the formula is very simple:\nformula_24\nFor 3x3 matrices the formula is more complicated:\nformula_25\nThere are no simple formulas for the determinants of larger matrices, and many computer programmers study how to get computers to quickly find large determinants.\nProperties of determinants.\nThere are three rules that all determinants follow. These are:"}
{"id": "5399", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5399", "title": "Matrix (math)", "text": ""}
{"id": "5400", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5400", "title": "Hawaiian", "text": "Hawaiian can be:"}
{"id": "5401", "revid": "766335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5401", "title": "British Isles", "text": "The British Isles are an archipelago (a group of islands) in north-western Europe. They have a long geographical and geological history. The first people were in Britain by 800,000 years ago (Happisburgh footprints).\nThe biggest islands are called Great Britain and Ireland, followed by the Isle of Man. Great Britain, the biggest island, is home to three countries. These are England, Wales and Scotland. The island of Ireland is divided into Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. Great Britain is the biggest island of Europe and Ireland is the third biggest.\nEngland, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland join together to make the United Kingdom.\nSome people include the Channel Islands of Jersey, Guernsey, Sark in the term \"British Isles\", but they are a lot closer to France than to Great Britain. In politics, they are British islands but in geology they are French islands.\nThe term tends not to be used in the Republic of Ireland because many people feel it implies that Ireland is politically British.\nThe writings of the Roman cartographer Ptolemy used the name \"Great Britain\" for the larger island in the 2nd century AD. He used the name \"Megale Britannia\" or \"Great Britain\" () to show the difference between this island and Ireland. For Ireland, Ptolemy used the name \"Mikra Britannia\" or \"Little Britain\" ()."}
{"id": "5403", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5403", "title": "Mandarin Chinese", "text": "Mandarin Chinese or simply Mandarin (; ) is the language of government and education of the Chinese mainland and Taiwan, with the notable exceptions of Hong Kong and Macau where a local dialect of Chinese called Cantonese is more often used.\nMandarin is one of five major regional languages of China. It spreads wider than any other regional variety, from the whole northern part of China to Yunnan Province in the southwest corner of China. In that big area there are many regional differences in vocabulary, so somebody who moves from Beijing to Yunnan could not understand people there who were speaking their own dialect, Yunnanhua. The problem is bigger than for a person in Great Britain or the United States to go to Australia. Therefore, starting in the 1920s, the Chinese government set up a national language based on the Beijing dialect and on the most widely understood words and pronunciations.\nMandarin is a standard language. It is nobody's native language, but a good average between various language forms and a common language everyone can understand and communicate with. Although it is based on the Beijing dialect, it is not the same as Beijing dialect.\nSchools use a dialect called Standard Mandarin, \"Putonghua\" (\u666e\u901a\u8bdd/\u666e\u901a\u8a71) meaning \"common (spoken) language\" or \"Hanyu\" (\u6c49\u8bed/\u6f22\u8a9e) meaning \"language of the Han\". In places such as Malaysia, it is known as \"Huayu\" (\u534e\u8bed/\u83ef\u8a9e). In Taiwan, it is known as \"Guoyu\" (\u56fd\u8bed/\u570b\u8a9e) meaning \"national language.\" There are some minor differences in these standards.\nMandarin is spoken by over 800 million people around the world, more than any other language. Most people emigrating from the Greater China region now speak Mandarin, while in past centuries most spoke Cantonese or Taishanese, another local Chinese dialect.\nStandard Mandarin is one of the six official languages at the United Nations. The others are English, French, Spanish, Russian and Arabic.\nWriting.\nMandarin is written with Chinese characters called \"H\u00e0nz\u00ec\" (\u6f22\u5b57 or \u6c49\u5b57) which literally means \"Han characters\". Each \"H\u00e0nz\u00ec\" has its own pronunciation and meaning. An ordinary dictionary will contain about 10,000 characters. Spoken Mandarin uses very many compound words, words that combine meanings the way English does in such terms as \"machine gun,\" \"fire truck,\" \"playground,\" etc.\nThe Hanzi are ideograms: one character means one \"idea\". The various concepts are derived from the ideograms by combining them. Mandarin can be also written phonetically (that is: written as it is spoken) with the Latin alphabet as you really cannot see the spelling from Hanzi characters. That is called transliteration. The most popular transliteration system is called Pinyin.\nSome Chinese characters were originally fairly concrete pictures of the things they represent. As time went on, people chose to write simpler versions that are easier to write but do not look so much like the real thing, just as people sometimes draw stick men rather than drawing people with real-looking bodies, arms, legs, etc. Here are some examples:\nMost characters, however, are made by combining pictures, using one to give a general meaning, and the other to represent a sound. For instance, \"\u5abd m\u0101\" (mom) is made by adding \u5973 (n\u01da, human female) to \u99ac (m\u01ce, horse). The \"ma\" part is only there to represent the sound.\nIn most dialects of ancient Chinese, one character was generally enough for one word, but modern spoken Mandarin uses mostly compounds like \"\u5abd\u5abd m\u0101ma,\" which is just \"mama,\"\nOther examples show different ways of combining components:\nJust as the English used in Great Britain favors \"petrol\" but the English used in the United States almost always uses \"gasoline,\" different regional languages in China may use different compound words to name the same thing.\nIn Spoken Mandarin, most words are character compounds because over time Mandarin lost many sounds that existed in earlier forms of Chinese. Due to the loss of sounds, many Chinese words ended up becoming homophones, thus more characters were added to words to tell them apart. For example, the Chinese title of the poem \"Lion-Eating Poet in the Stone Den\" \u65bd\u6c0f\u98df\u72ee\u53f2 is pronounced \"Sh\u012b Sh\u00ec Sh\u00ed Sh\u012b Sh\u01d0\", and every character in the poem is pronounced with the same syllable, but with different tones. In older forms of Chinese, one could have been to tell apart the different characters making up the title, as they could have sounded noticeably different from each other.\nThus, one-character words in Classical Chinese like\nbecame the Mandarin compound words\nto clearly distinguish such words from their homophones, otherwise the already mentioned characters could be mistaken for similar sounding characters like\nthus making spoken language difficult to understand without the compound words.\nDifference between Mandarin (Beijing Accent) and Beijing Dialect.\nMandarin is defined and designed based on Beijing accent. In China, there are over 600,000 dialects and more accents although they all use Chinese language and characters, but their pronunciation and some expressions are totally different. China must find a standard pronunciation to allow all people to understand each other and communicate. Beijing has been the capital city of China for more than 1,000 years, so China defined Beijing Accent as standard Mandarin.\nBeijing also has some local dialects that are not included by Mandarin or standard Chinese language yet. But with Beijing being the capital city as well as the political, economic, cultural and education center of China, more and more new Beijing dialects have been or will be accepted as Mandarin or standard Chinese language. The other dialects, such as Shanghainese, Cantonese, Hakka etc., have few opportunities to be included into Mandarin or standard Chinese language or be accepted by the whole of China.\nThe following samples are some Beijing dialects which are not yet accepted as standard Mandarin. \u500d\u513f: b\u00e8i'\u00e9r means 'very much'; \u62cc\u849c: b\u00e0nsu\u00e0n means 'stagger'; \u4e0d\u541d: b\u00f9l\u00ecn means 'do not worry about'; \u64ae: cu\u00f2 means 'eat'; \u51fa\u6e9c: ch\u016bli\u016b means 'slip'; \u5927\u8001\u7237\u513f\u4eec\u513f: d\u00e0l\u01ceoy\u00e9rmenr means 'men, males';\nThe following samples are some Beijing dialects which have been already accepted as Mandarin in recent years. \u4e8c\u628a\u5200: \u00e8rb\u01ced\u0101o means 'not very skillful'; \u54e5\u4eec\u513f: g\u0113menr means 'good male friends'; \u62a0\u95e8\u513f: k\u014dum\u00e9nr means 'parsimony'; \u6253\u5c0f\u513f: d\u01cexi\u01ceo'\u00e9r means 'since childhood'"}
{"id": "5404", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5404", "title": "Algeria", "text": "Algeria ( or ), officially the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, is a former French colony and the largest country in Africa. It is part of the Maghreb region of Northwest Africa. Algiers is the capital. It is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea in the north, Tunisia in the northeast, Libya in the east, Niger in the southeast, Mauritania and Mali in the southwest, Western Sahara in the west and Morocco in the northwest. It is also the largest country in the Arab world.\nHistory.\nPeople have lived in Algeria for thousands of years, which can be seen in the cave paintings at Tassili National Park that date to around 7000BC. By 600 BC, Phoenicians were in Hippo Regius (now called Annaba), Rusicade (now Skikda), and Tipasa in the central coastal part of the country. The Romans would annex (take over) the region by the conclusion of the Punic Wars in 146BC, with what is now modern day Algeria staying in Roman hands till the fall of the Roman Empire in the 5th century and the region being taken over by the Germanic Vandals. \nAlgeria would become part of the islamic world when the first Muslim Arabs came to Algeria in the mid-7th century, resulting in many people converting to the new religion of islam. In the 11th century, the Arab tribes of Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym were living between Tunisia and eastern Algeria (Constantois). The famous mathematician, Fibonacci (1170\u20141250) lived in Algeria as a teenager. This is where he learned the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system. Algeria was made part of the Ottoman Empire in 1517. Enslavement of black people was practiced there as it was throughout the empire.\nIn the 1500s and 1700s, the Spanish Empire ruled a lot of Algeria. France colonized Algeria starting in 1830. In 1954, the National Liberation Front (Front de Lib\u00e9ration Nationale or FLN) wanted freedom from France. They fought a war. It became independent from France in July 5, 1962.\nIn 1963 Ahmed Ben Bella became the first President of Algeria.\nThe Algerian Civil War started in 1991. It ended in 2002. the government stopped the state of emergency on 24 February 2011.\nGeography.\nA large part of southern Algeria is the Sahara Desert. The Aures and Nememcha mountain ranges are in the north. The highest point is Mount Tahat (3,003 m).\nLanguages.\nThe official languages of the country are Arabic as a first language and Berber as a second language. Many people speak French, too.\nPopulation.\nAlgeria's population is about 45 million people. There are over 40 cities with more than 100,000 people.\nPolitics.\nThe Parliament of Algeria is made up of two chambers:\nDivisions.\nThere are 48 provinces (since 1983) in Algeria, they are:\nUNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nThere are several UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Algeria including Al Qal'a of Beni Hammad, the first capital of the Hammadid empire; Tipasa, a Phoenician and later Roman town; and Dj\u00e9mila and Timgad, both Roman ruins; M'Zab Valley, a limestone valley containing a large urbanized oasis; also the Casbah of Algiers is an important citadel. The only natural World Heritage Sites is the Tassili n'Ajjer, a mountain range.\nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "5405", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5405", "title": "Plymouth, England", "text": ""}
{"id": "5406", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5406", "title": "Plymouth", "text": "Plymouth is a city and unitary authority in Devon, South West England. It is on the south coast. It has a large port at Devonport used by the Royal Navy. Nearly 250,000 people live in Plymouth and it is the largest place in Devon. West of Plymouth is the mouth of the River Tamar which is called the Hamoaze. Plymouth means mouth of the River Plym.\nHistory.\nThe Roman Catholic Bishop of Plymouth has his cathedral here. Plymouth was badly affected by German bombing during the Second World War, when many buildings were destroyed. The Plymouth Fathers and the Plymouth Brethren were both named after Plymouth. Plymouth is linked to Saltash in Cornwall by two bridges across the River Tamar: the Royal Albert Bridge (built in 1859) carries the railway line to Penzance and the Tamar Bridge the A38 main road. On Plymouth Hoe is the third lighthouse, which used to stand on the Eddystone Rock in the English Channel.\nSports.\nIt has a football team called Plymouth Argyle and a rugby football team called Plymouth Albion."}
{"id": "5409", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5409", "title": "Plymouth (disambiguation)", "text": "Plymouth is the name of various places:\nOther meanings of the word Plymouth are:"}
{"id": "5410", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5410", "title": "George Washington", "text": "George Washington (February 22, 1732 \u2013 December 14, 1799) was the first President of the United States from 1789 to 1797. Before he became president, he was the commander in chief of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War, and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States.\nEarly life.\nWashington's mother was Mary Washington and his father was August Washington. They owned a farm with slaves in Virginia.\nBefore the Revolutionary War.\nWashington became a farmer like his father. His farm was called Mount Vernon. He also worked as a surveyor, measuring land. Washington always wanted to be a soldier and was active in the colonial militia of Virginia. He was sent several times to the \"forks of the Ohio River\", now called Pittsburgh. His job was to get rid of the French who were trying to take control of the Ohio River Valley.\nHe failed and many of his men were killed. The fight opened the French and Indian War, bringing Britain into the Seven Years' War. In 1758 he was elected to the Virginia legislature.\nIn 1759, Washington married a widow named Martha Custis. The marriage produced no children.\nThe Revolution.\nWashington was a delegate to the First Continental Congress, which was created by the Thirteen Colonies to respond to various laws passed by the British government. The Second Continental Congress chose him to be the commanding general of the Continental Army. Washington led the army from 1775 until the end of the war in 1783. After losing the big Battle of Long Island, and being chased across New Jersey, Washington led his troops back across the Delaware River on Christmas Day, 1776, in a surprise attack on Hessian mercenaries at the small Battle of Princeton and Trenton, New Jersey. The British had more troops and more supplies than Washington, however, Washington kept his troops together and won these small battles.\nOverall, Washington did not win many battles, but he never let the British destroy his army. With the help of the French army and navy, Washington made a British army surrender at Yorktown, Virginia, in 1781, as the final major battle of the Revolutionary War. The war officially ended with the Treaty of Paris in 1783.\nAfter the War.\nWhen the Revolutionary War ended, Washington was considered a national hero. He was offered a government position that would have been considered a dictatorship over the colonies, but in a surprising move, Washington refused, left the army, and returned to Mount Vernon. He wanted the colonies to have a strong government but did not wish to head that government, nor did he want the colonies to be run by a tyrant.\nWashington was one of the men who said the country needed a new constitution. The Constitutional Convention met in 1787, with Washington presiding. The delegates wrote the Constitution of the United States, and all the states ratified it and joined the new government.\nPresidency.\nIn 1789, Washington was elected president without any competition, making him the first President of the United States. While Washington did not belong to any political party, he agreed with certain Federalist Party policies, such as the country should have a standing army and a national bank. He was re-elected to a second term. After his second term, Washington decided not to run for reelection, despite his popularity remaining high. His decision, to stop at 2 terms, set a precedent that every president followed until Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1940.\nIn Washington's farewell address in 1796, he warned the country not to divide into political parties and not to get involved in wars outside of the United States. Washington's non-intervention foreign policy was supported by most Americans for over one hundred years. His advice to avoid political parties was completely ignored, as parties were already active.\nRetirement.\nWashington went back home to Mount Vernon (Virginia) after his second term ended in 1797. He died two years later, on December 14, 1799, in Mount Vernon, at the age of 67, from pneumonia.\nWealth.\nFrom his marriage, George Washington owned a substantial amount of farm land, where he grew tobacco, wheat, and vegetables. Washington also owned more than 100 slaves, who were freed upon his death. He did not have much money in cash and had to borrow money while he was president. At his death, Washington's estate was worth over $500,000.\nFalse teeth.\nIt is a common misconception that George Washington had wooden teeth, as false teeth. He did, however, try many different ways to replace his teeth, including having teeth carved from elk's teeth or ivory. Ivory and bone both have hairline fractures in them, which normally cannot be seen, but started to darken due to Washington's use of wine. The darkened, thin fractures in the bone made the lines look like the grain in a piece of wood. George Washington's teeth started falling out when he was about 22 years old, and he had only one tooth left by the time he became president. It was difficult for him to talk or to eat. At one time, he had false teeth with a special hole so the one tooth he still had could poke through. He tried to keep them smelling clean by soaking them in wine, but instead they became mushy and black. In 1796, a dentist had to pull out George Washington's last tooth, and he kept his tooth in a gold locket attached to his watch chain. When the time came for the president to have his portrait painted, cotton was pushed under his lips to make him look as if he had teeth. The cotton made his mouth puff out, as is seen on the picture on the US $1 bill.\nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "5411", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5411", "title": "February 22", "text": ""}
{"id": "5414", "revid": "7864142", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5414", "title": "Abraham Lincoln", "text": "Abraham Lincoln (February 12, 1809 \u00a0\u2013 April 15, 1865) was an American politician. He was the 16th president of the United States. He was president from 1861 to 1865, during the American Civil War. Just five days after most of the Confederate forces had surrendered and the war was ending, John Wilkes Booth assassinated Lincoln. Lincoln was the first president of the United States to be assassinated. Lincoln has been remembered as the \"Great Emancipator\" because he worked to end slavery in the United States.\nLife.\nAbraham Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, in Hodgenville, Kentucky, United States. His parents were Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks. His family was very poor. Abraham had one brother and one sister. His brother died in childhood. They grew up in a small log cabin, with just one room inside. Although slavery was legal in Kentucky at that time, Lincoln's father, who was a religious Baptist, refused to own any slaves.\nWhen Lincoln was seven years old, his family moved to Indiana. Later they moved to Illinois. In his childhood he helped his father on the farm, but when he was 22 years old he left home and moved to New Salem, Illinois, where he worked in a general store.\nLater, he said that he had gone to school for just one year, but that was enough to learn how to read, write, and do simple math. In 1842, he married Mary Todd. They had four children, but three of them died when they were very young.\nAbraham Lincoln was sometimes called Abe Lincoln or \"Honest Abe\" because of a legend stating that he ran miles to give a customer the right amount of change. The nickname \"Honest Abe\" came from a time when he started a business that failed. Instead of running away like many people would have, he stayed and worked to pay his debt.\nEarly political career.\nLincoln started his political career in 1832 when he ran for the IGA Illinois General Assembly, but he lost the election. He served as a captain in the Illinois militia during the Black Hawk War, a war with Native American tribes. When he moved to Springfield in 1837, he began to work as a lawyer. Soon, he became one of the most highly respected lawyers in Illinois.\nIn 1837, as a member of the Illinois General Assembly, Lincoln issued a written protest of its passage of a resolution stating that slavery could not be abolished in Washington, D.C.\nIn 1841, he won a court case (Bailey v. Cromwell). He represented a black woman who claimed she had already been freed and could not be sold as a slave. In 1847, he lost a case (Matson v. Rutherford) representing a slave owner (Robert Matson) claiming return of fugitive slaves. After he moved to Illinois, he worked as a shopkeeper and \u00a0postmaster. He rode the circuit of courts for many years. When he was 21,\u00a0he worked on a flatboat that carried freight. He joined the Independent Spy Corp. At first, he was a member of the Whig Party. He later became a Republican. Lincoln ran for senate against Stephen A. Douglas. Douglas won.\nIn 1846, Lincoln joined the Whig Party and was elected to one term in the House of Representatives. After that, he ignored his political career and instead worked as a lawyer. In 1854, in reaction to the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, Lincoln became involved in politics again. He joined the Republican Party, which had recently been formed in opposition to the expansion of slavery. In 1858, he wanted to become senator; although this was unsuccessful, the debates drew national attention to him.\nThe Republican Party nominated him for the Presidential election of 1860.\nPresidency.\nLincoln was chosen as a candidate for the elections in 1860 for different reasons. Among these reasons were that his views on slavery were less extreme than those of other people who wanted to be candidates. Lincoln was from what was then one of the Western states, and had a bigger chance of winning the election there. Other candidates that were older or more experienced than him had enemies inside the party. Lincoln's family was poor, which added to the Republican position of free labor, the opposite of slave labor. Lincoln won the election in 1860, and was made the 16th President of the United States. He won with almost no votes in the South. For the first time, a president had won the election because of the large support he got from the states in the North. During his presidency Lincoln became well-known because of his large stovepipe hat. He used his tall hat to store papers and documents when he was traveling.\nThe Civil War.\nAfter Lincoln's election in 1860, seven States (South Carolina, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Texas and Louisiana) formed the Confederate States of America. When the United States refused to surrender Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, the Confederates attacked the fort, beginning the American Civil War. Later, four more states (Arkansas, Virginia, Tennessee, and North Carolina) joined the Confederacy for a total of eleven. In his whole period as President, he had to rebuild the Union with military force and many bloody battles. He also had to stop the \"border states\", like Kentucky, Missouri, and Maryland, from leaving the Union and joining the Confederacy.\nLincoln was not a general, and had only been in the army for a short time during the Black Hawk War. However, he still took a major role in the war, often spending days and days in the War Department. His plan was to cut off the South by surrounding it with ships, control the Mississippi River, and take Richmond, the Confederate capital. He often clashed with generals in the field, especially George B. McClellan, and fired generals who lost battles or were not aggressive enough. Eventually, he made Ulysses S. Grant the top general in the army.\nEmancipation Proclamation.\nWith the Emancipation Proclamation begun on January 1, 1863, Lincoln ordered the freedom of all slaves in those states still in rebellion during the American Civil War. It did not actually immediately free all those slaves however, since those areas were still controlled by the rebelling states of the Confederacy. Only a small number of slaves already behind Union lines were immediately freed. As the Union army advanced, nearly all four million slaves were effectively freed. Some former slaves joined the Union army after 1862.\nThe Proclamation also did not free slaves in the slave states that had remained loyal to the Union (the federal government of the US). Neither did it apply to areas where Union forces had already regained control, as in Tennessee. Until the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1865, only the states had power to end slavery within their own borders, so Lincoln issued the proclamation as a war measure.\nThe Proclamation made freeing the slaves a Union goal for the war, and put an end to movements in European nations (especially in Great Britain and France) that would have recognized the Confederacy as an independent nation. Lincoln then sponsored a constitutional amendment to free all slaves. The Thirteenth Amendment, making slavery illegal everywhere in the United States, was passed late in 1865, eight months after Lincoln was assassinated.\nGettysburg Address.\nLincoln made a famous speech after the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863 called the Gettysburg Address. The battle was very important, and many soldiers from both sides died. The speech was given at the new cemetery for the dead soldiers. It is one of the most famous speeches in American history.\nSecond term and assassination.\nLincoln was re-elected president by a small number of votes in 1864 and re-inaugurated March 4, 1865. Soon afterwards, it appeared likely that the Union would win the Civil War. Lincoln wanted to make it easy for states that had rebelled to restore self-government. On April 9, 1865, the leading Confederate general, Robert E. Lee, surrendered his armies. On April 11, 1865, Lincoln gave a speech in which he promoted voting rights for black American citizens.\nDuring the day on April 14, 1865, Lincoln signed the law that created the secret service, the US President's security force. On the evening of April 14, Lincoln went to attend a play with his wife, Mary Todd at Ford's Theater in Washington, D.C.. He had invited Ulysses S. Grant to attend the play with him and his wife Mary Todd, and Grant planned to attend. As a general, Grant would have brought his own extra military security force, but he did not attend the play because his wife Julia and Mary Todd did not get along well.\nDuring the third act of the play, John Wilkes Booth, a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland, entered the presidential box and shot Lincoln at point-blank range, mortally wounding him, and shouted \"Sic semper tyrannis\" (\"Thus always to tyrants\"). An unconscious Lincoln was carried across the street to Petersen House. He was placed diagonally on the bed because his tall frame would not fit normally on the smaller bed. He remained in a coma for nine hours before dying the next morning. According to some accounts, at his last drawn breath, on the morning after the assassination, he smiled broadly and then expired. Lincoln was the first American president to be assassinated.\nBooth escaped, but died from shots fired during his capture on April 26.\nLegacy.\nLincoln has been consistently ranked both by scholars and the public as one of the greatest U.S. presidents. He is often considered the greatest president for his leadership during the American Civil War and his eloquence in speeches such as the Gettysburg Address."}
{"id": "5415", "revid": "7524926", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5415", "title": "February 12", "text": ""}
{"id": "5416", "revid": "7443312", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5416", "title": "April 15", "text": ""}
{"id": "5420", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5420", "title": "Calvin Coolidge", "text": "Calvin Coolidge (born John Calvin Coolidge Jr.; July 4, 1872 \u2013 January 5, 1933) was the 30th president of the United States between 1923 and 1929. He was a conservative who supported business and lower taxes.\nFamily life.\nHe was the only president of the United States to be born on July 4. He was married to Grace Coolidge and had 2 children: John Calvin Coolidge III (born September 6, 1906 - died May 31, 2000) and John Calvin Jr. (born April 13, 1908 - died July 7, 1924). His younger son John Calvin Coolidge IV died at 16 while playing tennis at the White House. His son was wearing tennis shoes without socks and died from a toe infection. He was buried at the foot of Hill Cemetery. After this, President Coolidge may have been depressed.\nPolitical career.\nCoolidge served as the Mayor of Northampton, Massachusetts. He later served as the Governor of Massachusetts. As governor, he became famous because of his response during the Boston Police Strike. Coolidge fired the police who went on strike and gave the jobs to unemployed World War 1 veterans (he gave the same bonuses that the striking policemen asked for to the veterans).\nIn 1920, he was nominated Vice President under Warren G. Harding. The Harding-Coolidge team won easily. Harding died in 1923 and Coolidge became the next president. He was inaugurated at his family farm in Vermont by his father John Calvin Coolidge Sr.\nCoolidge finished Harding's term and was elected in 1924 to continue to be the country's president.\nCoolidge was president during a prosperous economy and the country did not face many challenges. He believed that the federal government should be as small as possible. He supported tax cuts and wanted the federal government to not intervene in the economy. Some think this is linked to the Great Depression.\nCoolidge was criticized for refusing to give subsidies to farmers and when a giant flood happened in Mississippi during 1927, he did not want the federal government to be involved. This was part of his belief of federalism, that the country's problems should be solved mainly by state governments and local governments rather than the federal government. \nHe did not run for re-election in 1928 and published his autobiography the following year.\nThe legacy of Calvin Coolidge is mixed. People who support more federal government involvement in the economy do not like him. People who support less federal government involvement in the economy like him.\nSilent Cal.\nCalvin Coolidge was nicknamed \"Silent Cal\" because he did not talk much. There is a story that at a dinner party, a woman once told Coolidge that she could get more than two words out of him, to which he replied \"You lose.\""}
{"id": "5421", "revid": "40354", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5421", "title": "Harry Truman", "text": ""}
{"id": "5422", "revid": "722721", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5422", "title": "Harry S. Truman", "text": "Harry S. Truman (May 8, 1884 \u2013 December 26, 1972) was the 33rd president of the United States, from 1945 to 1953. He became president when President Franklin D. Roosevelt died in office.\nAs president, Truman made important foreign policy decisions, such as using atomic weapons on Japan to end World War II; repairing Europe (which was destroyed during the war); beginning the Cold War, and getting the U.S. involved in the Korean War.\nEarly years.\nHarry S. Truman was born on May 8, 1884, in Lamar, Missouri. The initial, \"S\", in Truman's name has no meaning.\nTruman was raised in Independence, Missouri. He lived for 12 years as a Missouri farmer.\nThe presidential election of 1892 happened when Truman was eight years old. He wanted Grover Cleveland, a Democrat like Truman's family, to win. Grover Cleveland did win.\nTruman joined the United States Military in 1917. He went to France in World War I and became a captain in the Field Artillery.\nTruman left the military in 1919. That same year, he married Elizabeth Virginia Wallace. He opened a clothing store in Kansas City.\nOn February 17, 1924, Bess had a baby girl and named her Mary Margaret Truman.\nPolitical life.\nTruman was active in the Democratic Party. In 1922, he was elected judge of Jackson County Court.\nTwo years later, Truman lost the next county judge election. However, he was elected county judge again in 1926.\nIn 1934, Truman was elected Senator of Missouri. He became a member of the Interstate Commerce Committee. He was also the vice-chairman of a subcommittee on railroad safety.\nIn 1940, Truman ran for re-election to the Senate. First he would have to beat another Democrat, Governor Lloyd Stark, in a primary election. The primary election would decide which Democrat would go on to face a Republican candidate in the final elections in November.\nPresident Franklin Roosevelt and St. Louis Mayor Bernard Dickmann both wanted Stark to win. Truman had a hard time getting money. Most people thought he would lose. However, about a month before the primary election, the railroad unions said that they wanted Truman to win. Then, two days before primary election day, Bernard Dickmann also said that he wanted Truman to win.\nTruman won by about 8,000 votes. He also won the election in November.\nTruman became the head of a committee that looked at how much money the United States was spending on defense during World War II. He found billions of dollars of spending that he thought was a waste, and could be cut out of what the U.S. was spending. Truman supported Roosevelt's leadership of the country in the war, but wanted to make the government less wasteful and more effective. He became well known for leading that committee.\nVice Presidency, 1945.\nIn 1944, President Roosevelt ran for reelection again. Roosevelt was in bad health and he did not have much longer to live. The Democratic Party realized that whoever they selected as Vice President could be the next president of the United States. (In the U.S. government, if the President dies, the Vice President automatically becomes the new president.)\nHenry A. Wallace, Roosevelt's former Vice President, was not chosen because he had a friendly attitude toward the Soviet Union, which many people saw as a dictatorship. Roosevelt wanted Truman as his Vice President, and Truman was chosen.\nThey won the election, and Roosevelt began his fourth term as president. On April 12, 1945, shortly after his fourth inauguration, Franklin Delano Roosevelt died. Truman became president.\nPresidency, 1945\u201353.\nAbout becoming President, Truman said: \"it felt like the moon, the stars, and all of the planets had fallen upon me.\"\nTruman had become president during the last few months of World War II. While Truman was vice president, Roosevelt never told him much about World War II. At that time, people did not think of the Vice Presidency as an important job in politics. Because of this, Truman entered the presidency knowing not much more than the average person about what the U.S. military was doing in World War II.\nNazi Germany surrendered less than a month after Truman became president. This ended the war in Europe. However, the Japanese kept fighting. The Allies of World War II made the Potsdam Declaration, telling Japan to surrender or it would face \"prompt and utter destruction.\" Japan did not surrender, so Truman ordered the first atomic bomb to be dropped on Hiroshima, Japan, on August 6th, 1945. Three days later, Truman ordered the second atomic bomb to be dropped on Nagasaki, Japan. Japan surrendered and the war ended.\nThe huge destructive power of the atomic bombs razed both cities, and killed over one hundred thousand people, with many more dying of radiation induced illnesses over subsequent years. People who disagreed with the decision, like General and future president Dwight Eisenhower, believe it was a cruel and inhumane attack on innocent people, when Japan was already close to being beaten. Other people thought it was a good decision because it ended the war early. Truman thought that if the U.S. had invaded Japan instead of using the bombs to end the war quickly, many more Americans would have died.\nAfter the war.\nAfter the war, Truman ordered Europe (which was destroyed during the war) to be repaired with the Marshall Plan. Germany was divided into two parts after the war. The Soviet Union controlled East Germany. The United States, Britain, and France controlled West Germany. During the Soviet blockade of West Berlin, Truman ordered the Berlin Airlift, which flew in tons of food to West Germany to feed the starving people.\nTruman also helped create the United Nations, an organization which was based on the League of Nations. The United Nations still exists today. Its goal is for different countries to work together to help humanity and to promote peace.\nAfter World War II, the Soviet Union and the United States were the only two powerful countries left. With Germany being divided between the Soviet Union and the United States, tensions began to increase between the two countries. The Cold War began. This was a war where the Soviet Union and the United States did not fight directly, but each wanted to have a bigger influence than the other over the world. The Soviet Union wanted to spread communism around the world. (Communism is the belief that the government should own the economy to make everybody equal). Truman believed in a policy called containment: that the U.S. should contain communism and stop it from spreading. Truman declared the Truman Doctrine, which said the United States should give money to Turkey and Greece so that they could be strong enough to defend themselves from communism.\nTruman sent Congress his \"Fair Deal.\" It was based on Roosevelt's New Deal. It gave more money to education, more money to farmers, and a higher minimum wage for workers. Labor union leaders asked him for higher wages and more benefits.\nAfter coal miners went on strike, Truman had the Department of the Interior take over the mines. While Truman sympathized with the working class, when there was a huge railroad strike, Truman believed it was illegal. He also thought it was unfair to people who could not get to work because the railroads were not running. He reacted by threatening to force the strikers to go into the army if they did not return to work.\nTruman de-segregated the military, allowing blacks and whites to fight together.\n1948 election.\n\"Further information: 1948 United States presidential election\"\nIn 1948, Truman ran for a second term as President against Thomas Dewey. He was the underdog and everyone thought he was going to lose. The Chicago Tribune published a newspaper on the night of the election with the title \"Dewey Defeats Truman\". To everyone's surprise, Harry Truman won the election.\nThe Korean War.\nOn June 25, 1950, North Korea attacked South Korea. China supported North Korea. North Korea wanted to bring Communism into South Korea.\nThe U.S. fought the Korean War to defend South Korea and keep communism from spreading there. General Douglas MacArthur wanted to bomb China. Truman thought it was too dangerous to do that, so he fired MacArthur. Many people respected MacArthur, so they were angry at Truman. He made Mathew B. Ridgeway general.\nDuring the end of his term, Harry Truman's approval rating was at an all-time low. He was very unpopular because thousands of Americans died in the Korean War; there was a medium amount of corruption in his government; and people were accusing many of Truman's employees of being communists. He left office on January 20, 1953. The Korean War ended about six months later.\nAs time passed, Truman's reputation got better. Many historians now believe that Harry Truman was a great president.\nLater life.\nTruman moved back to Missouri. He died on December 26, 1972 in Kansas City, Missouri of multiple organ failure caused by pneumonia at the age of 88."}
{"id": "5423", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5423", "title": "John Adams", "text": "John Adams, Jr. (October 30, 1735 \u2013 July 4, 1826) was the second president of the United States (1797\u20131801), and father of the sixth president, John Quincy Adams. He was also the first vice president of the United States (1789\u20131797).\nAdams was born in Braintree, Massachusetts. He was the son of Lt. Col. John Adams, Sr. (1691-1761) and Susanna Boylston (1708-1797), and he was the cousin of the philosopher Samuel Adams. He went to Harvard College. He married Abigail Adams in 1764.\nRevolution years.\nAdams wanted the Thirteen Colonies to be free from Great Britain. However, Adams was fair and thought every person should be treated fairly. Even though he did not want British soldiers in Boston, he was the lawyer who defended the British soldiers who were involved in the Boston Massacre.\nAdams was a representative from Massachusetts during the Second Continental Congress. He helped Thomas Jefferson write the United States Declaration of Independence. During the American Revolutionary War, Adams helped make peace with Great Britain. He served in France, the Netherlands and England as an ambassador in the 1780s.\nVice President.\nAdams was the first vice president under George Washington. After Washington chose not to run again, Adams won the 1796 election. Adams is thought to have been the first president to belong to a political party, but like George Washington, he thought himself above any particular party. He ran for president on the Federalist ticket. He beat Thomas Jefferson of the Democratic-Republican Party. President candidates and vice president candidates did not run together like they do today. Since Jefferson got the second-highest number of votes, he became vice president.\nPresident.\nDuring his term, he resolved a conflict against France peacefully. He also passed the Alien and Sedition Acts which made it illegal to say bad things about the government. Many people did not like those acts because they felt it took away their freedom of speech. Adams was not re-elected president and lost to Thomas Jefferson. The Federalist Party was not as popular as it was when Adams was elected. One of his last acts as president was to make John Marshall the Chief Justice of the United States. This made sure that the Federalist Party would still be important.\nOf the first five U.S. presidents, Adams was the only one who did not own slaves. He was also the only one to be from New England.\nDeath.\nAdams died on July 4, 1826 of heart failure. This was the same day that Thomas Jefferson died, and was also exactly 50 years after the Declaration of Independence was signed in 1776."}
{"id": "5424", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5424", "title": "Bill Clinton", "text": " \nWilliam Jefferson \"Bill\" Clinton (born William Jefferson Blythe III; August 19, 1946) is an American politician and humanitarian activist. He was the 42nd president of the United States from 1993 to 2001. Before he was president, Clinton was the governor of Arkansas from 1979 to 1981 and 1983 to 1992, as well as the attorney general of Arkansas from 1977 to 1979. \nHe took office at the end of the Cold War. Clinton was the first president from the baby boom generation. He was 46 years old when he was elected and the third youngest president. He was impeached in 1998 for lying about his sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky. Clinton was the second president to be impeached. \nHe is married to Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was the 67th United States Secretary of State from 2009 to 2013, U.S. senator from New York from 2001 to 2009, and the Democratic nominee for president in the 2016 U.S. presidential election.\nEarly years.\nClinton was born William Jefferson Blythe III at Julia Chester Hospital in Hope, Arkansas. His biological father, William Jefferson Blythe. Jr, died in a car accident, three months before Clinton was born. His mother, Virginia Clinton Kelley was a Nurse anesthetist. He took the last name Clinton because it was his stepfather, Roger Clinton, Sr.'s name. Clinton grew up in Hot Springs, Arkansas. In high school, Clinton played the saxophone. Clinton went to college at Georgetown University. During his college years, Clinton worked under several politicians. He later went to Oxford University and Yale Law School. Clinton did not fight in the Vietnam War because he was in the ROTC for a short time.\nBefore being President.\nClinton married Hillary Rodham in 1975. In 1980, their daughter, Chelsea Clinton, was born.\nAfter law school, Clinton was elected Attorney General of Arkansas in 1976 and governor of Arkansas in 1978. At 32, he was the youngest governor in the country at that time. Clinton was governor of Arkansas from 1979 to 1981 and again from 1983 to 1993. Clinton was known for being a \"New Democrat\" while governor. During his time as governor, Clinton changed the state's school system. There was also a scandal called Whitewater during Clinton's term.\nPresidency.\nIn the 1992 presidential election, he beat Republican George H. W. Bush. During the early part of Clinton's first term, he put in place a tax code which would increase taxes on the rich.\nIn 1994, during Clinton's first term in office, the Congress switched to a Republican majority. However, Clinton still beat Republican Bob Dole in the 1996 election.\nThe Republicans defeated Clinton's proposal for the U.S. government to adopt universal health care. The Republicans proposed many new ideas to Congress to limit the size of government such as requiring the budget to be balanced and to stop people from abusing the welfare system.\nClinton was sued by Paula Jones for sexual harassment, but the lawsuit was officially dismissed after Jones failed to prove damages. This made him the first sitting United States president to be sued.\nPresident Clinton was accused of wrongdoing by the U.S. House of Representatives in December 1998 during the Monica Lewinsky scandal and was impeached. Although he lied that they did not engage in sexual activity, he was found to have done nothing wrong by the U.S. Senate in February 1999.\nThe country faced few challenges during his term. The Cold War was over and there was very little need for the U.S. military to get involved in the world's affairs, so defense spending was significantly lowered. The economy was doing very well during his term, though there is a debate whether the economy was well because of Clinton's policies or because of the Republicans' policies.\nThe decade ended with it being the first time the United States did not have to borrow money to pay for its budget. Clinton left office in 2001 with high approval ratings and was succeeded by George W. Bush.\nPost-presidency.\nAfter his presidency, he wrote some books and traveled around the world helping out the United States. He is married to former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and now lives in New York. He has written \"My Life\", a book about his life, and several other books. Clinton has received two Grammy Awards, both for books he read on tape. He is now the U.N.'s envoy to Haiti. He also became a vegetarian.\nIn 2013, Clinton started following Buddhist meditation to help him relax.&lt;ref name=\"http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2183101/Bill-Clinton-turns-art-Buddhist-meditation-relax.html\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nOn November 20, 2013, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor of the United States, by President Barack Obama.\nOn October 12, 2021, Clinton was hospitalized with sepsis in Irvine, California."}
{"id": "5426", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5426", "title": "American dollar", "text": ""}
{"id": "5429", "revid": "1127430", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5429", "title": "Yield", "text": "In economics, the yield is how much money somebody is paid each year for leaving his or her money invested somewhere. Unlike a corporate dividend, a yield is fairly certain, unless there is a bankruptcy. This means that somebody usually knows how much money they are going to make from their yield ahead of time.\nYields can be different because of inflation. However, there is usually an order for which are most risky and which are the least: the least risky instruments, such as treasury bonds, yield the least, then safe and \"guaranteed\" instruments like long-term deposits, then overnight deposits, and so on to the various municipal bond and corporate bonds. Extremely risky instruments with high yield are usually called junk bonds."}
{"id": "5430", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5430", "title": "Moral purchasing", "text": "Moral purchasing is when a person uses moral reasoning to decide what to buy. For example, when a person chooses to buy local goods instead of those from other countries, helps neighbours and processes that one can point to quickly."}
{"id": "5431", "revid": "1144263", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5431", "title": "Social network", "text": "A social network is a set of people who interact. This includes group organizations. The social relationships may include friendship/affect, communication, economic transactions, interactions, kinship, authority/hierarchy, trust, social support, diffusion, contagion, and so on. \nCalling social relationships a network calls attention to the pattern or structure of the set of relationships.\nA community social network is the pattern of relationships among a set of people and/or organizations in a community. Each of these networks can involve social support, give people a sense of community, and \nlead them to help and protect each other.\nHow big a personal network becomes depends on the individual and the type of relationships considered. \"The set of people that a person knows well or with whom a person frequently interacts seldom exceeds several hundred\". As the size of a network grows, keeping relationships is strained by the size. There is a so-called \"Law of 150\" which suggests that about 150 people is the best size for a village or large clan though most people live in much bigger towns. Some experts think that a corporation has an ideal size of about 70 people: these people and their spouses would also make a large social network.\nThe free rider problem is that someone uses the social network but does not give help when needed. Social networks are vulnerable to them, since the circumstances where help is required, like disasters, occur by surprise. It might happen that someone cannot help at that one time - it might also happen that they are not there the next time. Only slowly does it become obvious who is and is not contributing to the safety of the group, or who is avoiding this duty.\nSocial networks are held together by common interest. This may be employment, common interest in a sport or pastime, a religion (a mosque, church or temple is almost always a center of a social network). Often the network has an identity of its own which is quite real, even though it may have no official recognition. Networks may be centered on places, or on families, or on worldwide communities with common interests. "}
{"id": "5432", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5432", "title": "Cabal", "text": "A cabal is a group of people who try to control things in a secret way. Cabals are often an important part of a conspiracy theory.\nSometimes people say \"There Is No Cabal\", or use the abbreviation TINC to mean \"There Is No Cabal\". The joke is that since a cabal is necessarily secret, only those who are in the cabal can know.\nPolitics.\nThe former chief of staff, Lawrence Wilkerson, of the Secretary of State Colin Powell said that the foreign policy of George W. Bush's administration were run by a \"Cheney-Rumsfeld cabal\". With this word he meant that the President had not really the power that he is given by the constitution and that the Vice President and the Secretary of Defense had more influence than they should have. "}
{"id": "5433", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5433", "title": "Creating", "text": "Creating is making new things that have not existed before, usually by combining two or three things that existed. Art is almost always called creative, but so are other activities like music, mathematics, technology, business, craft, building, gardening and forestry, if they combine things to get new things.\nWhen several people cooperate in more than one process of creating, that is a creative network. This cuts risk since anything creative involves some chance that it will simply not work.\nWhat is \"not creative\" is usually called imitative, and includes anything that is mostly trying not to do what has never been done \u2013 like law, sports, science, war and especially education. These involve more direct competition, so risk comes from the competitor who may do it better. The word team is used for such groups.\nMost people fear change and new things, and so what is most stable and considered important by society tends to be imitative and done in teams. But unless society encourages creating it loses out to others by competition in business or technology, so there must be some creative networks, somewhere, in labs or art studios.\nViews of control of creative work also depend very much on religious and spiritual views of nature (or a creator) creating Man, according to economist Lester Thurow. Those ethical traditions that see \"Man in the image of God\" have created legal codes (see guild, intellectual right, intellectual interest, intellectual property) to tightly control what they are creating or have created. These are now the basis of organizations such as WIPO or ICANN. Often, such laws also create control over things which are merely found, not created.\nMany people give away what they have created and never think about it as property \u2013 other people try to control it and get paid every time anyone sees it \u2013 or even every time they just talk about it.\nWikipedia uses the GNU FDL which is a content license that tries to get people to combine what they are creating, with no one clearly in control. This is considered strange by many people, who are uncomfortable with that idea, or seek to control some aspect of it themselves."}
{"id": "5434", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5434", "title": "Human science", "text": "Human science is the science of humans: what makes them different from animals, and their limits, which tend to be the same as those of other animals. Because human bodies are animal bodies, human science is part of biology which leads to Life Science. However human behaviour includes the use of words, measures, numbers, knowing time and having memory, and such habits as trade - thus economics and psychology are considered to be part of human science. A general human science is anthropology which studies only the differences between humans and near relatives.\nOne important debate in human science is whether the exchange of culture (or in economics instructional capital), is only among humans or if it also goes on among our Great Ape near relatives. If so, then culture is part of primatology and there is no clear line between human science and life sciences.\nAnother name for human science is Social Science, since the most complex thing about humans is how they relate to each other in society. The most general social science is ethics, or economics, depending on your point of view.\nHowever, life science also deals with humans as objects of study (notably in medicine), while hard science such as chemistry deals with humans as the observer who \"does\" the study - sets the scale at which observation can happen, incurs observer effects - as studied in philosophy of science.\nOften sciences have different names based on whether they study humans or not. For instance economics is the study of how humans make a living, while ecology is the study of how non-humans make a living. Medicine is normally restricted to humans while veterinary medicine refers to the same techniques made on other species. One relies more on ethics and less on economics when dealing with humans, at least according to any ethical tradition.\nThe living, social, and sensory observing aspects of humans are probably all part of the human sciences to the degree they affect how humans view themselves.\nSpecific human sciences are (in addition to anthropology and ethics and economics) include psychology, sociology and linguistics. There is debate as to whether mathematics is something human or if it is universal - see philosophy of mathematics on this."}
{"id": "5435", "revid": "4591787", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5435", "title": "Flaying", "text": "Flaying is a form of torture, mutilation, and execution. It is the act of stripping the skin and flesh from the bones. Flaying an enemy while alive is an ancient practice. Accounts attribute the practice to the ancient Assyrians, who were said to flay the skin from a captured enemy or rebellious ruler and nail it to the wall of his city, as warning to all who would defy their power. Searing or cutting the flesh from the body was sometimes used as part of the public execution of traitors in medieval Europe. A similar mode of execution was used as late as the early 18th century in France; one such episode is graphically recounted in the opening chapter of Michel Foucault's \"Discipline and Punish\" (1979)."}
{"id": "5437", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5437", "title": "Rice", "text": "Rice (\"Oryza sativa\") is a type of cereal and food. In origin, it is a swamp grass. It is eaten as staple food in many parts of Asia. It is grown in warm parts of the world, mainly Asia, Africa, northern Italy, and the west coast of North America.\nRice accounts for 80% of the calories eaten in Asia, or one-fifth of the calories eaten worldwide by humans. It is the agricultural commodity with the third-highest worldwide production (rice, 741.5 million tonnes in 2014), after sugarcane (1.9 billion tonnes) and maize (1.0 billion tonnes). However, judged by value, the world trade in wheat is greater than all other crops combined. All these cereals are grasses. \nRice used to be the main diet in many countries. Various kinds of food processing prepare rice for eating. It is usually cooked. In some areas, such as Spain, rice is first fried in olive oil or butter, then cooked with water or soup. In other areas, such as India, rice is eaten with sauce, curry, or soup. Rice can also be used to make alcohol, such as Japanese sake rice wine.\nRice is believed to have been first grown in ancient southern China and India around 2500 BC. Rice-growing was brought to Japan possibly in the 1st century BC, and became popular during the 2nd century and the 3rd century. From India, rice spread to southern Europe and Africa.\nAlluvial loamy and clayey soil is ideal for growing rice. The rice crop needs about 24\u00b0C or above with minor variations during sowing, growing and harvesting seasons. It grows well in the areas where rainfall is above 100cm. Deltas, river valleys, coastal plains and terraced fields in mountainous regions are ideal for its cultivation.\nRice is usually planted in a flat field filled with water. Before cropping, the water is drained from the field. Before farmers developed a good farming system and fertilizers, they used to let lands rest for 1 to 2 years while farming in other lands. \nIn some hot areas, close to the equator, farmers do double-cropping which means raising two crops one year.\nRice contains a lot of carbohydrates. There are different ways of milling rice. Brown rice has only had the outer layer removed. It contains more fibre than the completely milled white rice.\nRice varieties.\nThere are several grains called \"rice\": they have been cultivated for thousands of years. There are a huge number of varieties.\nAsian rice (\"Oryza sativa)\" is most widely known and most widely grown, with two major subspecies and over 40,000 varieties. Also notable are varieties of African rice (\"Oryza glaberrima\") and wild rice (genus \"Zizania\"). Rice may vary in genetics, grain length, color, thickness, stickiness, aroma, growing method, and other characteristics. \nRice can be divided into different categories on the basis of each of its major characteristics. The two subspecies of Asian rice, \"indica\" and \"japonica\" have different length and stickiness. Indica rice is long-grained and unsticky, while japonica is short-grained and sticky.\nFor instance, over nine major varieties of rice exist for the purpose of making sake alone.\nIR8.\nA naturally occurring strain of rice, IR8, is believed to have saved many lives. \nThe new strain, part of the Green Revolution, had defects. It lacked taste, and the team spent 20 years improving its quality, and its resistance to fungi and pests. The team's later work was to reduce its bad effect on diabetes type 2 and on its vitamin A content."}
{"id": "5439", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5439", "title": "Tight lacing corset", "text": ""}
{"id": "5444", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5444", "title": "Yoga", "text": "Yoga is an old discipline from India. It is both spiritual and physical. Yoga uses breathing techniques, exercise and meditation. It helps to improve health and happiness. \"Yoga\" is the Sanskrit word for \"union\". Patanjali was a pioneer of classical yoga. He defined yoga as \"the cessation of the modification of the mind\" (\"stopping changing the mind\").\nA person doing yoga will move from one posture (called \"asana\") to another, but there are also other aspects which are important in yoga, such as breath-work, mantras, mudras (postures of the hands and fingers), meditation and much more (for more information, check out the Yoga Sutras). For example, the \"sun-salutation\" contains 12 poses of asanas, one after the other, and is said to help balance body and soul. There is a specific mantra for each asana. The \"sun-salutation\" is popularly known as \"Suryanamaskar\".\nHistory.\nYoga was introduced by Indian Ascetic. Ascetic practices (\"tapas\") are referenced in the (900 to 500 BC), early commentaries on the Vedas. Several seals discovered at Indus Valley Civilization (~3300\u20131700 B.C.) sites in Pakistan depict figures in positions resembling a common yoga or meditation pose. The pose shows \"a form of ritual discipline, suggesting a precursor of yoga\", according to archaeologist Gregory Possehl. Scholars think there must be some type of connection between the Indus Valley seals and later yoga and meditation practices, though there is no conclusive evidence.\nSome popular Yogasanas.\nA yogasana is a pose in which a person can sit. The intention of yogasana is to exercise the body and make it free of pains and problems.\nYogi is a person who has mastered yoga or has achieved great success in yoga. Yogasanas are also called \"Asana\" or \"Asanas\" (plural). A Yogi can sit in any asana for a given time.\nThis yogasana helps to release gas in the stomach.\nThis yogasana makes the spine more relaxed."}
{"id": "5445", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5445", "title": "Human development theory", "text": "Even though economics is all about choice on the basis of what is available rather than what should be available, the big question relates to who decides how resources should be distributed and how economics can embrace a trade-off between different groups which each seek to make the most of their allocation of resources. If \"what should be\" cannot be incorporated, the subject of economics will be as dry as desert as described by Ayn Rand. The challenge therefore is to construct a model combining \"what is\" to \"what should be\" and make the same acceptable to common man as well as politicians. Not being able to sell the idea as such is a defeat to the discipline. The issue is that of influence and not of theory, as Adam Smith perceived that no group of business men ever met other than to exploit the consumer."}
{"id": "5450", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5450", "title": "Cattle", "text": "Cattle is a word for certain mammals that belong to the genus \"Bos\". Cattle may be cows, bulls, oxen, or calves. Cattle are the most common type of large domesticated hoofed animals. They are a prominent modern member of the subfamily Bovinae.\nCattle are large grazing animals with two-toed or cloven hooves and a four-chambered stomach. This stomach is an adaptation to help digest tough grasses. Cattle can be horned or polled (or hornless), depending on the breed. The horns come out on either side of the head above the ears and are a simple shape, usually curved upwards but sometimes down. Cattle usually stay together in groups called \"herds\". One male, called a \"bull\" will usually have a number of \"cows\" in a herd as his harem. The cows usually give birth to one \"calf\" a year, though twins are also known to be born. The \"calves\" have long strong legs and can walk a few minutes after they are born, so they can follow the herd.\nCattle are native to many parts of the world except the Americas, Australia and New Zealand. Cattle have been domesticated for about 9,000 years. They are used for milk, meat, transport, entertainment, and power.\nWord use.\nThe word \"cattle\" has been used in English for about 1,000 years and the meaning has changed. In books such as the King James Version of the Bible, the word is used for all sorts of farm animals, including horses, sheep and goats. The word comes from the \"Old French\" word,'chattels', meaning all the things that a person owns.\nThe word \"cattle\" is used for some wild animals as well as for domesticated cattle. Wild cattle include the water buffalo from South East Asia, the musk ox and yak from Central Asia, the bison of North America and Europe and the African buffalo. The last aurochs, wild cattle of Europe, were killed in Masovia, Poland in 1627.\nCattle vocabulary.\nAn intact male bovine is called a bull. A young male bovine is called a bullock. A mature female that has given birth to at least one or two calves is called a cow. A young bovine between birth and weaning is called a calf. Two or more of these young bovines are calves. A female that has never had a calf is called a heifer, (pronounced \"heffer\"). Calving is the act of a cow or heifer giving birth to a calf.\nBecause very few bulls are needed to breed with many cows and heifers and to form a complete breeding herd, most male cattle are used for meat. They are \"castrated\" by removing the testicles to prevent them from being able to breed other cows and heifers, and to take away the male characteristics that are common with bulls. A male that has been castrated before reaching puberty is called a steer. An ox is a male bovine that has been castrated after puberty and is trained and used for draft purposes, such as pulling a plow or a wagon. Cattle can either be horned, which are two bony points coming out on either side of a beast's head, one on each side, or polled, where no horns are grown but a somewhat pointy poll is found at the top of a cow's head.\nThe adjective that is used to describe something that is like a cow or an ox is \"bovine\".\nThe words \"cow\", \"bull\" and \"calf\" are also used to describe some other large animals that are not related to cattle, such as elephants, moose and whales.\nBiology.\nCattle are found all over the world, from as far north as Canada and Russia to the dry inland of Australia. The only continent they are not found on is Antarctica. Different types and breeds of cattle are suited to different environments. \"Bos indicus\" cattle such as the Brahman breed are suited to subtropical and tropical areas, whereas \"Bos taurus\" cattle such as Angus cattle are more suited to temperate or colder climates. Their large wide hooves are good in both wet areas and dry grassland. Their hairy coat grows much longer in the winter and has an extra fluffy layer to hold in warmth. They shed this extra layer in springtime in preparation for the hot summer ahead. Most cattle, except those of the \"Bos indicus\" subspecies do not have sweat glands in their skin, but their wet nose is a useful cooling system. They can also pant like a dog as well.\nCattle can make a range of noises, from a gentle \"moo\" to a low growl in warning or to attract females, especially among bulls. When they are angry or upset, they can bellow or bawl quite loudly. Calves are said to bawl, cows moo and bulls bellow.\nCattle are herbivorous, meaning that they are plant-eating (primarily grass) animals. Eating grass is called \"grazing\". They have very strong tongues and strong lower front teeth that help them to graze. Unlike a horse, cattle do not have any upper front teeth. A cow often swallows grass whole. After a cow has eaten its fill and is resting, they return or regurgitate the grass from their stomach to their mouth and rechew it with their very large back teeth to break it down further. This is called \"chewing the cud\". Other ruminants like deer, sheep and goats also do this. Horses do not. This means that cattle do not need as much food as horses, even though they are about the same size.\nCattle are ruminants which mean they have a stomach with several chambers which helps digest their food more efficiently. A cow's stomach has four chambers called the \"reticulum\", \"rumen\", \"omasum\" and \"abomasum\". The reticulum is known as the \"hardware\" stomach because it is mainly used as a storage area for hard things that the cow might accidentally swallow like nails, rocks and other objects. The rumen is the largest chamber in a ruminant's stomach, and in cattle it can hold up to 50 gallons feed. It is the chamber where fermentation takes place to help break down the grass that the cow has eaten. The omasum, also known as \"many piles\" is a compartment that squeezes or absorbs all the water that has accumulated from the digestion that has gone on in the rumen. The fourth chamber is the abomasum which similar in function to a human's stomach, and so is called the \"true stomach.\" \nCows have \"breasts\" called \"udders\" which are joined together in a large sac, often pink in colour, found hanging between the back legs. The udder is divided into four parts, or quarters, each with a large \"teat\" that the calf is able to grasp with its mouth to suckle from. Cows begin milk production a few days before a calf is born, and can continue to produce milk when bred again and when pregnant with their next calf. Heifers, unless they have given birth to their first calf, do not produce milk. Dairy cows tend to have much larger udders than beef cows, and as such, these type of cows will usually produce more milk than what is needed to feed one calf. \"Dairy cows\" are female cattle that are raised to produce lots of milk for human consumption. \"Beef cows\", on the other hand, are female cattle that are used to raise a calf from birth that is used for beef later in its life. Both types of cows will keep producing milk as long as it is demanded, either by the calf, by the milking machine, or by the human that is hand-milking them. When milk from them is no longer needed, they will not explode: they simply \"dry up,\" where the milk they produce is absorbed or taken back in by their bodies. Cows are pregnant for around 9 months, or an average of 280 days.\nBulls can often be fierce and dangerous, especially in the presence of their herd of cows and heifers. In the wild, they will often fight each other over mating rights and their herds of cows and will use their horns to \"gore\" each other. Some bulls will fight to the death: others will fight until either one of the bulls decides to run off. They also protect the herds from other animals such as wolves, jackals, bears, tigers and lions. On farms, bulls are usually quieter and more docile and can be led by a nose-ring by their owners, but they can be aggressive with other bulls and with strange people or animals who might get too near his herd. Dairy bulls like Jerseys and Holsteins tend to be more aggressive than bulls of beef breeds like Hereford and Angus. Not all cattle have horns. Bulls with no horns fight by head-butting the other's head, neck, side or belly, and will use their heads to push each other around. \nFor the reasons above, most male cattle are either sent to slaughter while they are still calves or are castrated so that they are much less likely to fight each other, or be aggressive towards the farmer that is raising them, making them safer to handle and keep until it is time to send them to market. Steers have no other purpose except to be raised, sold and slaughtered for beef.\nUses of Cattle.\nEver since people started using cattle in prehistoric times, cattle have been a sign of wealth. In many countries, particularly in Africa and Asia, a person's wealth is judged by the number of cattle they own. Different breeds are used differently. \nCattle are very useful animals. Their flesh can be eaten as meat. Their milk can be drunk and turned into cheese and yoghurt. Their skin can be used as leather. They can pull carts and plows. They can make the power to turn flour mills or pump water. The food that they eat is not expensive, and often not in competition with what people eat.\nDairy cattle.\nDairy cattle are kept and raised specially for milking. Herds of cows are kept and are regularly mated with a bull, so that they produce calves. This keeps the milk supply going. However, most commercial dairy farms do not keep bulls because of the concern that such bulls are very dangerous when being handled. Instead, cows are artificially inseminated with bull semen that is stored kept frozen in liquid nitrogen, and is \"bred\" by a person who artificially inseminates cows for a living.\nSome large dairy herds, especially those used to produce organic or \"free-range\" milk are kept on pasture where there is a good supply of grass and the fields are relatively small, but not so small that they are not able to graze regularly during the season when grass is growing. This is because the cows need to be brought in for milking every day, twice a day, and should not have far to travel.\nA number of dairy herds are kept in barns or sheds for most of their lives and are given feed that has been especially made for them. This feed contains grain like corn, hay including grass and alfalfa or clover, and fermented chopped feed called silage that is usually made from corn, wheat or barley. Cows are often kept in stalls where they have enough room to lay down comfortably. Such large dairies must supply straw or saw dust for the cows to rest on without getting sore from the hard concrete floor.\nCows can be milked by hand, but in many countries where there are large dairies, the cows are milked by a \"milking machine\". The milk is collected in a large stainless steel container where it undergoes pastuerization, a process that heats milk to a very high temperature to kill any bacteria that are living in the milk. The milk is then taken by truck to a milk or dairy factory to be made into the milk we drink by being separated to remove most of the cream. It is then put into bottles or cartons to be sold. Some milk is also turned into cheese, ice cream, butter, cream and even yogurt. All of these dairy products are packaged or put into cartons or bottles and sold.\nMany types of cattle are used for milk. They include:\nBeef cattle.\nBeef cattle are bred and raised specifically to provide meat or beef. \"Steers\" are the best type for this purpose because they can be kept in herds without fighting each other. \"Heifers\" are also often used for beef, especially those that are not suitable to be used in a breeding herd. The cows of beef cattle are used to give birth to and raise calves for meat. They are not usually used for milk, although some types of cattle, such as the Red Poll, Dexter or Red Devon (also known as the North Devon or Devon) are used for both. These type of cattle are called dual purpose breeds.\nBeef cattle are often allowed graze over large areas because they do not have to be brought in every day like dairy cattle. The biggest farms in the world are \"cattle stations\" in Australia, \"ranches\" in North America and \"ranchos\" in Latin America where they run beef cattle.\nUntil the mid 20th century, beef cattle were often sent to market \"on the hoof\". Cowboys or drovers would herd the cattle along the roads or on trails to the cattle markets in big towns or cities, or to railway stations where they would be loaded and shipped to these towns or cities. In Australia, sometimes the cattle would travel for hundreds of miles along roads known as 'Traveling Stock Routes'. Big herds would have thousands of 'heads of cattle'. (Cattle are counted by the \"head\".) Nowadays cattle are usually sent to the market in huge lorries known as road-trains. In North America, cattle are sent to auction marts, slaughter plants or other farms or ranches by large semi-trucks called cattle liners.\nThe meat from a calf is called 'veal' and from an older beast, 'beef'. Meat that is cut into flat pieces for frying or grilling is called 'steak'. Every part of a beast can be used. The skin becomes leather. The meat which is not used by humans becomes pet food and almost everything that is left over becomes garden fertilizer. Many other products can be and are often made from cattle: for example, car tires, home insulation, paint, hand lotion, soap, jello, and many drugs are made from parts of cattle. Cow's blood is often used in special effects in the creation of action or horror movies. Bones from cattle can be made into knife handles or napkin rings. The list is endless.\nTypes of cattle that are used for beef: \nOxen.\n\"Oxen\" are cattle trained as work animals. The word \"ox\" is used to describe just one. They are castrated males (steers).\nAn ox is over four years old and grown to full size when it begins to work. Oxen are used for pulling plows and wagons, for hauling heavy loads like logs or for powering different machines such as mills and irrigation pumps.\nOxen are most often used in teams of two for light work such as plowing. In past days, very large teams of fourteen to twenty oxen were used for heavy work such as logging. The oxen are put into pairs and each pair must work together. A wooden yoke is put about the neck of each pair, so that the work is shared across their shoulders. Oxen are chosen from certain breeds with horns, since the horns hold the yoke in place when the oxen lower their heads, back up or slow down.\nOxen must be trained from a young age. The owner must make or buy as many as a dozen yokes of different sizes as the animals grow. Ox teams are steered by shouted commands, whistles or the noise of a whip crack. Men who drove ox teams were called teamsters in America, wagoners in Britain, or in Australia, \"bullockies\". Many bullockies and teamsters were famous for their voices and for their foul language.\nOxen can pull harder and longer than horses, especially for very large loads. They are not as fast as horses, but they are less often injured or less likely to startle than horses are. Many oxen are still in use all over the world, especially in poor countries."}
{"id": "5458", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5458", "title": "Friend", "text": ""}
{"id": "5459", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5459", "title": "Quick", "text": "Quick may refer to:"}
{"id": "5460", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5460", "title": "Thunder", "text": "Thunder is a very loud sound that is made sometimes during a very big rain storm.\nThunder is so loud, it can be heard from a very far distance.\nIt can sound like a boom, a crash, or a rumble.\nThunder is made when lightning strikes.\nThe energy from the lightning heats up the air so much that it makes a kind of explosion.\nWhen lightning is very near, thunder will be heard soon after the lightning flash, and the sound will be very loud. If the lightning is farther away, the thunder will be a few seconds or many seconds after the lightning. People can guess how far away the lightning is by counting the number of seconds between the time they see the lightning and hear the thunder."}
{"id": "5461", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5461", "title": "1", "text": "The year 1 (I) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. The year started on a Monday in the Gregorian calendar. It was the first year of the 1st century and 1st millennium.\nIt is one of only seven years to use just one Roman numeral. The seven are 1 AD (I), 5 AD (V), 10 AD (X), 50 AD (L), 100 AD (C), 500 AD (D), and 1000 AD (M).\nAt the time, it was known as the \"Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Paullus\". The denomination 1 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the main method in Europe for naming years. The year before this is 1 BC in the widely used Julian calendar."}
{"id": "5462", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5462", "title": "2", "text": "The year 2 (II) was a common year that started on Sunday, according to the Julian calendar. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Tuesday.\nAt the time, it was known as the \"Year of the Consulship of Vinicius and Varus\". It was the 2nd year of the 1st century."}
{"id": "5463", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5463", "title": "3", "text": "The year 3 (III) was a common year which started on a Monday. according to the Julian calendar. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Wednesday. At the time, it was known as the \"Year of the Consulship of Lamia and Servilius\". The year is called 3 since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the usual method in Europe for naming years. It was the 3rd year of the 1st century."}
{"id": "5464", "revid": "527152", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5464", "title": "4", "text": "The year 4 (IV) was a leap year which started on a Tuesday, according to the Julian calendar. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Thursday. At the time, it was known as the \"Year of the Consulship of Catus and Saturninus\". It was called the fourth year since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the usual method in Europe for naming years. It was the 4th year of the 1st century."}
{"id": "5465", "revid": "7096136", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5465", "title": "5", "text": "5 (V) is a common year of the Julian calendar which started on a Thursday. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Saturday. It was known as the \"Year of the Consulship of Messalla and Cinna\". It was the 5th year of the 1st century.\nIt is one of only seven years to use just one Roman numeral. The seven are 1 AD (I), 5 AD (V), 10 AD (X), 50 AD (L), 100 AD (C), 500 AD (D), and 1000 AD (M)."}
{"id": "5466", "revid": "7698011", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5466", "title": "6", "text": "6 (VI) is a common year of the Julian calendar which started on a Friday. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Sunday. It was the 6th year of the 1st century."}
{"id": "5467", "revid": "7772764", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5467", "title": "7", "text": "7 (VII) is a common year of the Julian calendar which started on a Saturday. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Monday. It was the 7th year of the 1st century."}
{"id": "5468", "revid": "527152", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5468", "title": "8", "text": "8 (VIII) is a leap year of the Julian calendar which started on a Sunday. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Tuesday. It was the 8th year of the 1st century."}
{"id": "5469", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5469", "title": "9", "text": "9 (IX) is a common year of the Julian calendar which started on a Tuesday. According to the Gregorian calendar, it started on a Thursday. It was the 9th year of the 1st century."}
{"id": "5470", "revid": "1125177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5470", "title": "10", "text": "10 is a year in the 1st century. It was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, throughout the Roman Empire, it was known as the year of the consulship of Dolabella and Silanus "}
{"id": "5471", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5471", "title": "11", "text": "11 is a year in the 1st century. It was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Taurus."}
{"id": "5472", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5472", "title": "12", "text": "12 is a year in the 1st century. It was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Capito."}
{"id": "5473", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5473", "title": "13", "text": "13 is a year in the 1st century. It was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silius and Plancus."}
{"id": "5481", "revid": "941292", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5481", "title": "30", "text": "30 is a year in the 1st century. It was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vinicius and Longinus."}
{"id": "5483", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5483", "title": "50", "text": "50 (Roman numerals: L) is a common year of the Gregorian calendar. It started on a Saturday.\nIt is one of only seven years to use just one Roman numeral. The seven are 1 AD (I), 5 AD (V), 10 AD (X), 50 AD (L), 100 AD (C), 500 AD (D), and 1000 AD (M)."}
{"id": "5488", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5488", "title": "0", "text": ""}
{"id": "5489", "revid": "134900", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5489", "title": "3 (number)", "text": "The number three (3) is one more than two and one less than four. It is the first Mersenne prime. Three is an important number for many cultures (groups of people living together). It is also a prime number. It is the first odd prime. In Roman numerals, it is III."}
{"id": "5496", "revid": "73230", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5496", "title": "10 (number)", "text": "10 (ten ) is the number that is after nine and before eleven. Most people have ten fingers and ten toes.\nTen is the smallest positive whole number with two digits. Ten is an important number because most people write numbers using multiples of ten. This is called the decimal number system.\nIn Roman numerals, 10 is written as X."}
{"id": "5497", "revid": "73230", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5497", "title": "Hundred", "text": ""}
{"id": "5504", "revid": "805501", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5504", "title": "Man", "text": "A man is a male adult. He is the opposite of a woman. People use the word \"man\" (one \"man\", two or more \"men\") to talk about gender. Manhood is the period in a male's life after he changes from a boy. A boy is a male child; a female child is called a girl. After boys reach maturity, they can be called a man.\nLike most other male mammals, a man inherits an X chromosome from his mother and a Y chromosome from his father. The men's rights movement is a group that tries to fight for men's rights and opposes misandry.\nSomeone who changes gender to male would also be called a man.\nBiology and gender.\nThere are some sexual differences between a man and a woman. Men have sex organs which we call \"external\" (not inside the body). But many parts of the male reproductive system are internal too. The study of male reproduction and sex organs is \"andrology\".\nMen normally have the same illnesses as women, but there are some sexual illnesses which men have only, or more often.\nThere are more differences between men and women, not only sexual differences.\nSome examples of secondary sexual characteristics in male humans:\nBiology is not the only thing which makes people feel they are men, or that other people are men. Perhaps one in 100,000 men were born without a male body. We call these \"transgender\" or \"transsexual\" men. Some men can have a hormone or chromosomal difference (for example \"androgen insensitivity syndrome\"). Some men have other intersex conditions. Some of those intersex people who people said were female (girls) when they were born want to change this later in their lives. "}
{"id": "5505", "revid": "727439", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5505", "title": "Woman", "text": "A woman is a female human adult, including trans women. People use the word \"woman\" (one woman, two or more women) to talk about biological sex and/or gender identity. Sometimes, the term woman is used regardless of age, as in phrases such as \"Women's rights\". Also to include gender identity. \nA woman has a uterus or \"womb\". A baby develops in the uterus, a sexual organ exclusive to females.\nIn the 18th century, biologists began using the symbol for the goddess Venus (\u2640\ufe0f) as indicating a female plant or animal. It is often used for women.\nRights.\nWhile women have gained many more rights and freedoms in most of the developed world, especially since the beginning of the 20th century, many women still face discrimination and harassment worldwide. In earlier centuries, women in most of the world did not have rights, including the right to vote, and were treated with even less respect than today. \nEtymology.\nThe Latin \"f\u0113mina\", whence \"female\", is likely from the root in \"fell\u0101re\" (to suck), in reference to breastfeeding.\nA transgender is a woman who was born with a male reproductive system and chose to be identified as a woman. \nGender roles.\nAmong hunter-gatherers, women often work at gathering food and looking after children. This especially happened in the past. Many societies have traditionally patriarchal values, where men are considered to be the leader of the family.\nIn some modern societies, these roles have changed to allow single, career oriented women to become a regular part of society. Feminism has helped make this possible. However, women still face sexism in the industry today, including difference in salary compared to men.\nViolence against women.\nViolence against women is still a problem even in modern society.\nEducation.\nBefore modern societies, education of women has been limited. In developed countries, most women have access to education, and even perform better than men at many levels. In the United States in 2005 and 2006, women have earned 62% of associate degrees, 58% of bachelor's degrees, 60% of master's degrees, and 50% of doctorates.\nThe lack of education in women has been decreasing, and more women today have at least completed tertiary education.\nScience, literature and art.\nThroughout history, women have made contributions to science, literature, and art. There were many female writers, but many published their work under a male name. In music, women have been composers, songwriters, performers, singers, conductors, scholars, teachers, critics and more."}
{"id": "5506", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5506", "title": "Position", "text": "Position is a way to explain where something is.\nLocation.\nThe words which indicate position are called prepositions.\nLeft, middle, and right.\nTo find which is your left hand side, hold your hands palms down, point your index fingers and stick your thumbs out at right angles. The finger and thumb of your \"left\" hand will form a capital letter L. \nIf the letter L you make is reversed, you found your right hand. Left and right are called opposite sides.\nMiddle is between \"up\" and \"down\" and is between \"left\" and \"right\".\nMiddle means the same as \"center\".\nencyclopedia Examples \nFar and near.\nFar means that something is a long way away from you. Near means it is \"close\" to you. Things can also be near and far other persons and other things.\nIn sports.\nIn many sports, the term \"position\" is used to show what occupation a person has on their team. For example, in baseball, positions include catcher, shortstop and pitcher. \nIn math and physics.\nThe position of something is where that thing is in space and time. Usually people use Cartesian coordinates to write down a position. So a scientist might say that the balloon was at \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" when it popped at a certain time. \nIn society.\nThe position of a person is his status or responsibility in a community or group of people. It is called rank in the army.\nIn a factory the manager is a typical position."}
{"id": "5507", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5507", "title": "Left", "text": ""}
{"id": "5508", "revid": "465447", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5508", "title": "Right", "text": "Right might mean:"}
{"id": "5509", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5509", "title": "Up", "text": ""}
{"id": "5510", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5510", "title": "Down", "text": ""}
{"id": "5511", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5511", "title": "Middle", "text": ""}
{"id": "5512", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5512", "title": "Center", "text": ""}
{"id": "5513", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5513", "title": "In", "text": ""}
{"id": "5514", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5514", "title": "Out", "text": ""}
{"id": "5515", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5515", "title": "Inside", "text": ""}
{"id": "5516", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5516", "title": "Outside", "text": ""}
{"id": "5517", "revid": "983938", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5517", "title": "Arundel Castle", "text": "Arundel Castle is a castle in Arundel, West Sussex, England. It was built by Edward the Confessor."}
{"id": "5520", "revid": "511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5520", "title": "Arundal Castle", "text": ""}
{"id": "5522", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5522", "title": "Religious Society of Friends", "text": "The Religious Society of Friends is a group with Christian roots that began in England in the 1650s. The formal title of the group is the Society of Friends or the Religious Society of Friends.\nPeople in the Society of Friends are called \"Friends\" or Quakers - both mean the same thing. Most Quakers are Christian but the group today includes a few other people. They live all over the world, but the largest groups are in Kenya, the United States of America, Bolivia, Guatemala, the United Kingdom (England), and Burundi.\nHistory.\nThe Society of Friends began in the 1650s in England. A man named George Fox spent several years struggling to figure out how to be a good Christian. He finally heard God's voice telling him that Christ would make it clear to him what he should do. Fox went around preaching to people. He told them they could talk to God themselves - that they did not need a priest or minister to do it for them. He told them that if they listened within themselves they would hear Christ telling them what to do. Fox found other people who had similar experiences. Together they started a religious movement that later became the Religious Society of Friends.\nThe government of England did not like this new group; at the time it was against the law not to belong to the Church of England. They put a lot of Friends in jail, or made them pay money as a punishment. At first, the word \"Quaker\" was a name used to make fun of Friends, but after a while those people came to like it and use it for themselves.\nSeeking freedom of religion, some Quakers moved away to places like America. A young Quaker named William Penn started a new colony there. He got the land because King Charles II of England owed his father a lot of money. This new colony was called Pennsylvania, and it was a place where people could belong to any religion. Penn wanted people to be fair to each other, and he called the biggest city in his new colony Philadelphia, which means \"The City of Brotherly Love.\" Soon there were many Quakers in America.\nThe Quakers were very active in America in the nineteenth century (1800s). Many of the leaders of the abolition and women's rights movements, such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott, were Quakers.\nToday there are about 375,000 Quakers in the world. This number is very small compared to other religious groups. Even so, a lot of people have heard of the Quakers, because they have worked hard to make our world more fair and just.\nWorship.\nQuaker worship services are called \"meetings for worship\". They start with everybody sitting quietly. This is because they are trying to listen to God. Sometimes, a Quaker will feel that God wants him or her to say something. When this happens, the person stands up and tells everyone. Then they all sit quietly again. At some meetings, a many people will speak. At other meetings, nobody speaks. Quakers feel that a meeting for worship helps them to understand what God wants. Usually, worship lasts about an hour.\nAnyone can go to a Quaker meeting.\nQuakers also have meetings for worship for weddings and funerals\u2014when two people get married, or if someone dies. When two people get married, the meeting is about them and the life that they will live together. When someone has died, the meeting is about remembering things about the person and the life they had.\nMany Quakers in North America, South America, and Africa have a different kind of worship service, like other Christian services. They sing hymns and a pastor gives a sermon. They also have a quiet time, but it does not last as long. These Quakers often have strong Christian beliefs.\nAnd at other times these meetings also decide what Quakers should do - these meetings can be called \"meetings for business\", but other people call them \"meetings for worship for business\", because they include parts of both worship and business.\nWay of Life.\nQuakers seek religious truth in their inner experiences. They rely on conscience to guide what they do. They emphasise direct experience of God rather than ritual or ceremony. They believe that priests and rituals are unnecessary and can get between the believer and God. What Quakers say matches what they do.\nAlmost all Quakers share these beliefs:"}
{"id": "5526", "revid": "1124822", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5526", "title": "Size", "text": "The size of something is how much space the thing takes. It can also be described as how big or small something is.\nSizes can be measured. When a size is measured, it is given a number.\nWords for sizes.\n\"Small\" and \"big\" are opposites."}
{"id": "5527", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5527", "title": "Large", "text": ""}
{"id": "5530", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5530", "title": "Big", "text": ""}
{"id": "5532", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5532", "title": "List of Spanish Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5533", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5533", "title": "List of Welsh Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5534", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5534", "title": "List of Scottish Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5535", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5535", "title": "List of Portuguese Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5536", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5536", "title": "List of Italian Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5537", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5537", "title": "List of German Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5538", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5538", "title": "List of Austrian Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5539", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5539", "title": "List of English Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5540", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5540", "title": "List of French Football teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "5543", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5543", "title": "Your mileage may vary", "text": ""}
{"id": "5544", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5544", "title": "Near", "text": ""}
{"id": "5545", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5545", "title": "Far", "text": ""}
{"id": "5546", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5546", "title": "Opposite", "text": "Opposite may refer to:"}
{"id": "5547", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5547", "title": "Direction", "text": "Direction follows an imaginary line connecting two points.\nSomething following the line is moving in that \"direction\". People show directions by pointing.\nThe word \"direction\" is made from the root \"direct\" meaning to guide.\nThese are words used to talk about a direction:"}
{"id": "5548", "revid": "664627", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5548", "title": "Starvation", "text": "Starvation is when a person or animal has not eaten food for such a time that they are unable to do things in a normal way.\nAfter the stomach has been left empty for so long the body starts to give up.\nThere are many effects of starvation. These can include:\nThe metabolism naturally lowers when a person is starved. This makes weight loss slower.\nConsistently not being able to eat enough will lead to permanent damage to the organs. This is the case for humans when they do not eat enough for about 1-2 months. A process called catabolysis will break down body tissues, using them as fuel to keep vital functions (the nervous system and the heart) working. It will first use muscles before it starts destroying fat. \nStarvation was also used to inflict a death penalty. People who eat nothing usually die in a few months.\nIn 1944 Ancel Keys started a scientific experiment about starvation. The participants were all men. They ate 1800 calories a day."}
{"id": "5549", "revid": "372842", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5549", "title": "Microsoft Word", "text": "Microsoft Word or MS Word (often called Word) is a graphical word processing program that users can type with. It is made by the computer company Microsoft. Its purpose is to allow users to type and save documents. \nSimilar to other word processors, it has helpful tools to make documents.\nMicrosoft Word is a part of Microsoft Office, but can also be bought separately.\nHistory.\nThe program was first released in 1981.\nMany of the ideas and features in Microsoft Word came from Bravo, the first graphical writing program.\nMicrosoft bought the Bravo program, and changed its name to \"Microsoft Word\".\nWhen it first came out, it was not very popular, and did not sell as well as other writing programs like WordPerfect.\nAlthough it was not very popular when it came out, it had a feature called \"WYSIWYG\" (What You See Is What You Get), which meant that people can change the visual style of writing (e.g. bold, italics), by selecting and formatting text, when in other programs like WordPerfect, people had to add special 'codes' to change the style of writing. \"WYSIWYG\" is now a common feature of all computer writing programs.\nVersions.\nThere are versions for Microsoft Word for other operating systems as well as Microsoft Windows. New versions support fewer operating systems, although they always support Windows.\nPopularity.\nThe program is very popular.\nWithout configuration the program saved the document in a proprietary file format, so other programs could not open it. When the user sent his document to a friend, the friend needed a copy of Microsoft Word to read the document. Then that friend would probably also save documents in the same secret format of Word. This gave Microsoft Word a dominant position."}
{"id": "5553", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5553", "title": "Ant", "text": "Ants are a kind of insect that lives together in large colonies. They are the family Formicidae.\nAnts are a lot like wasps and bees. They all came from the same kind of animal a long time ago, but now they are different. There are about 22,000 different kinds of ants, but we only know of 12,500 for sure. Every kind of ant has a thin part in the middle of their body and two long body parts on their heads called antennae.\nAnts live in groups that can be big or small. Some kinds of ants live in small groups and eat other animals. Some ants work together in very big groups. These groups can have millions of ants in them that travel outside every day in a big area. Ants are small, but they are very strong. Some ants are strong enough to carry things that are as heavy as 20 ants. Some ants are called workers. Workers dig tunnels and carry food back to the colony so that other ants and the queen ant can eat.\nColonies.\nThe groups that ants live in are called colonies. A colony has a female ant called a queen which lays eggs. Those eggs will grow into more ants. Big colonies of ants have different kinds of ants that grow from the eggs. These are called different castes of ants. Some are \"workers\" which do jobs like carrying and digging, and \"soldiers\" which fight other animals. Worker and solider ants are females. Another type of ant are \"drones\" which are male ants. \nReally big ant colonies are sometimes called \"superorganisms\". This means the ants work together so well that they are like little parts of one big animal. Ants cannot live by themselves for very long because they need to work with other ants.\nAnts have colonies almost everywhere on planet Earth. Antarctica lacks ants because it's very cold and there's not much food. Small islands may not have ants.\nEvolution.\nThe family Formicidae belongs to the order Hymenoptera, which also includes sawflies, bees and wasps. Ants evolved from a lineage within the vespoid wasps.\nPhylogenetic analysis suggests that ants arose in the Lower Cretaceous period about 110 to 130\u00a0million years ago, or even earlier. One estimate from DNA studies places the origin of ants at \u2248140 million years ago (mya). Another study puts it in the Jurassic at 185 \u00b1 36 mya (95% confidence limits).\nAfter the rise of flowering plants about 100\u00a0million years ago ants diversified. They became ecologically dominant about 60\u00a0million years ago.\nIn 1966 E.O. Wilson and his colleagues identified the fossil remains of an ant (\"Sphecomyrma freyi\") from the Cretaceous period. The specimen, trapped in amber dating back to more than 80\u00a0million years ago, has features of both ants and wasps. \"Sphecomyrma\" was probably a ground forager but some suggest that primitive ants were likely to have been predators underneath the surface of the soil.\nDuring the Cretaceous period, a few species of primitive ants ranged widely on the Laurasian super-continent (the northern hemisphere). They were scarce in comparison to other insects, representing about 1% of the insect population.\nAnts became dominant after adaptive radiation at the beginning of the Cainozoic. By the Oligocene and Miocene ants had come to represent 20-40% of all insects found in major fossil deposits. Of the species that lived in the Eocene epoch, approximately one in ten genera survive to the present. Genera surviving today comprise 56% of the genera in Baltic amber fossils (early Oligocene), and 92% of the genera in Dominican amber fossils (apparently early Miocene).p23\nTermites, though sometimes called \"white ants\", are not ants and belong to the order Isoptera. Termites are actually more closely related to cockroaches and mantids. Termites are eusocial but differ greatly in the genetics of reproduction. The similar social structure is attributed to convergent evolution. Velvet ants look like large ants, but are wingless female wasps.\nDevelopment and reproduction.\nThe life of an ant starts from an egg. If the egg is fertilised, the progeny will be female (diploid); if not, it will be male (haploid). Ants develop by complete metamorphosis with the larval stages passing through a pupal stage before emerging as an adult. The larva is fed and cared for by workers.\nFood is given to the larvae by trophallaxis, a process in which an ant regurgitates liquid food held in its crop. This is also how adults share food, stored in the 'social stomach', among themselves.\nLarvae may also be given solid food brought back by foraging workers, and may even be taken to captured prey in some species. The larvae grow through a series of moults and enter the pupal stage.\nThe differentiation into queens and workers (which are both female), and different castes of workers, is influenced in some species by the food the larvae get. Genetic influences, and the control of gene expression by the feeding are complex. The determination of caste is a major subject of research.p351, 372\nA new worker spends the first few days of its adult life caring for the queen and young. It then does digging and other nest work, and later, defends the nest and forages. These changes are sometimes fairly sudden, and define what are called \"temporal castes\". An explanation for the sequence is suggested by the high casualties involved in foraging, making it an acceptable risk only for ants that are older and are likely to die soon of natural causes.\nMating.\nMost ant species have a system in which only the queen and breeding females can mate. Contrary to popular belief, some ant nests have multiple queens (polygyny). The life history of \"Harpegnathos saltator\" is\nexceptional among ants because both queens and some workers\nreproduce sexually.\nThe winged male ants, called \"drones\", emerge from pupae with the breeding females (although some species, like army ants, have wingless queens), and do nothing in life except eat and mate.\nThe nuptial flight.\nMost ants produce a new generation each year. During the species specific breeding period, new reproductives, winged males and females leave the colony in what is called a \"nuptial flight\". Typically, the males take flight before the females. Males then use visual cues to find a common mating ground, for example, a landmark such as a pine tree to which other males in the area converge. Males secrete a mating pheromone that females follow. Females of some species mate with just one male, but in some others they may mate with anywhere from one to ten or more different males. Mated females then seek a suitable place to begin a colony. There, they break off their wings and begin to lay and care for eggs. The females store the sperm they obtain during their nuptial flight to selectively fertilise future eggs.\nThe first workers to hatch are weak and smaller than later workers, but they begin to serve the colony immediately. They enlarge the nest, forage for food and care for the other eggs. This is how new colonies start in most species. Species that have multiple queens may have a queen leaving the nest along with some workers to found a colony at a new site,p143 a process akin to swarming in honeybees.\nA wide range of reproductive strategies have been noted in ant species. Females of many species are known to be capable of reproducing asexually through parthenogenesis, and one species, \"Mycocepurus smithii\" is known to be all-female.\nAnt colonies can be long-lived. The queens can live for up to 30\u00a0years, and workers live from 1 to 3\u00a0years. Males, however, are more transitory, and survive only a few weeks. Ant queens are estimated to live 100 times longer than solitary insects of a similar size.\nAnts are active all year long in the tropics but, in cooler regions, survive the winter in a state of dormancy or inactivity. The forms of inactivity are varied and some temperate species have larvae going into the inactive state (diapause), while in others, the adults alone pass the winter in a state of reduced activity.\nUses.\nIt may seem strange that ants have uses, but there are some. Some people use ants for food, medicine and rituals. Some species of ants are used for pest control (they eat pests that destroy food for humans). They can damage crops and enter buildings, though. Some species, like the red imported fire ant, live in places where they came to by complete accident."}
{"id": "5555", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5555", "title": "Scissors", "text": "Scissors are a tool used for cutting thin material like:\nKnives are better than scissors for some uses. Unlike a knife, scissors have two sharp edges.\nSome types of scissors, like children's scissors, are not very sharp. Children's scissors are often protected with plastic. These are called \"Safety Scissors\".\nScissors can be made for left-handed or right-handed people. Using scissors made for the wrong hand is very hard for most people. \nThere are many kinds of scissors used for cutting different materials and shapes."}
{"id": "5556", "revid": "212981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5556", "title": "Indigo", "text": "Indigo is a shade of blue, more specifically, purplish blue or dark blue. \nIsaac Newton named and defined indigo as a spectrum color when he divided up the spectrum into the seven colors of the rainbow. The spectral range of indigo is between 450 and 420 nanometers. \nThe name of the color indigo originally came from the indigo plant. Indigo is a dye made from the indigo plant, used to dye cloth. Indigo dye also is used to dye denim cloth, which is used to make what are called blue jeans (they should really be called \"indigo jeans\"). This shade of indigo is called \"indigo dye.\"\nThe indigo plant originally came from the nation of India. The Ancient Greek language word for the dye is \"indikon\". The Romans used the term \"indicum\", which passed into Italian dialect and eventually into English as the word indigo. \nThese things are colored indigo:"}
{"id": "5557", "revid": "7609704", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5557", "title": "Violet (color)", "text": "Violet is the seventh color of the rainbow--it is the color on the inner edge of the rainbow. Violet is the color between blue and purple. The name of the color comes from the violet, which is a small flower grown in most parts of the world.\nThe first written use of \"violet\" as a color name in English was in 1370."}
{"id": "5558", "revid": "1155480", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5558", "title": "Malcolm IV of Scotland", "text": "Malcolm IV of Scotland (c. 1141- December 9, 1165) was the grandson of David I of Scotland. He succeeded his grandfather as King of Scotland in 1153. He never married or had children. Not much is known about him."}
{"id": "5561", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5561", "title": "David I of Scotland", "text": "David I of Scotland (1084 \u2013 May 24, 1153) was the son of Malcolm III of Scotland and Saint Margaret of Scotland."}
{"id": "5562", "revid": "1033392", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5562", "title": "Saint Margaret of Scotland", "text": "Saint Margaret of Scotland (c. 1045 - 16 November 1093) was married to Malcolm III of Scotland. She was the mother of David I of Scotland, Alexander I of Scotland and Edgar. She was the daughter of Edward the Exile, and the granddaughter of Edmund Ironside. She was probably born in Hungary. \nMargaret died four days after her husband."}
{"id": "5565", "revid": "1155480", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5565", "title": "Alexander I of Scotland", "text": "Alexander I of Scotland (c. 1078 - 23 April 1124) was the son of Malcolm Canmore and Saint Margaret of Scotland. He became the King of Scotland in 1107. In the same year, he married Sybilla, who was an illegitimate daughter of Henry I of England."}
{"id": "5566", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5566", "title": "Henry I of England", "text": "Henry I of England (c. 1068 C.E. - 1 December 1135 C.E.), also called Henry Beauclerc (meaning good scholar), was the King of England. He ruled from, 1100 until his death in 1135. Henry was born in Selby, Yorkshire. He was the fourth son of William the Conqueror and Queen Matilda of Flanders. Henry was the only child born in England. His mother had come to England for her coronation in 1068. \nHenry was educated in Latin and the liberal arts. His parents probably raised him to go into the Church when he was old enough. On William's death in 1087, Henry's two older brothers were each left half of their father's kingdom. Robert Curthose became Duke of Normandy. William Rufus became king of England. But Henry, still a minor, was left with no inheritance. Henry purchased the County of Cotentin in western Normandy from Robert. But Robert and William Rufus forced him out in 1091. Henry gradually rebuilt his power base in the Cotentin. He then allied himself with William against Robert. Henry was present when William died in a hunting accident in 1100. Robert was away on Crusade. Henry, who was present when William was killed, rushed to seize the English throne for himself.\nAs King, Henry tried to make social reforms. He issued the Charter of Liberties which is considered a predecessor of the Magna Carta. He put back in place some of the laws of Edward the Confessor.\nHenry and his wife had two children, Matilda and William Adelin. William died in the White Ship sinking on November 25, 1120. Henry also fathered more illegitimate children than any other English King. Estimates by various historians place the number between 20 and 25.\nHenry died in 1135. He was visiting his daughter and grandchildren in Normandy. After his death, his daughter Mathilda and his nephew, Stephen, argued over who would become the ruler of England, and started a civil war called The Anarchy."}
{"id": "5568", "revid": "1104357", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5568", "title": "William the Conqueror", "text": "William the Conqueror (\u20131087), also known as William I of England, was the first Norman King of England (1066\u20131087). He was also the Duke of Normandy from 1035 until his death. \nAt the Battle of Hastings, William defeated Harold Godwinson, the last Anglo-Saxon king of England. That event is shown on the Bayeux Tapestry. He changed the course of both Norman and English history. He and Harold fought to see who would have the English throne. Harold was killed at the battle of Hastings in 1066.\nEarly life and minority.\nWilliam was the son of Robert I, Duke of Normandy by his concubine Herleva. He was born in Falaise, Normandy in 1027 or 1028. William became the Duke of Normandy when his father died in 1035. In 1034 or 1035 Duke Robert wanted to go on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. He made his noblemen swear to make his young son William their duke if he was killed.\nBut William's minority rule of Normandy did not start well. Some Normans did not want a boy as their duke. Robert II Archbishop of Rouen was a powerful man in Normandy. He protected William. King Henry I of France also approved of William. In 1037, Archbishop Robert died. Without his support Norman nobles began fighting among themselves. Some wanted William out of the way and tried to kill him. One of William's servants was killed in the very room where William slept. Two more of William's protectors died during this time. Normandy was in complete disorder.\nIn 1042 William held a church council in Normandy. At that council the church made a new law called the Truce of God. It was to help stop all the private wars. There could be no fighting on feast days or fast days. No fighting was allowed from Thursday night until Monday morning. The punishment for breaking the truce was excommunication. William probably reached the age of majority in about 1044. He no longer needed tutors. He could now rule on his own.\nDuke of Normandy.\nVal-es-Dunes.\nThe private wars continued into 1046. William's rule depended on the loyalty of his viscounts. By the fall of 1046 many of the families in lower Normandy began plotting to replace William as duke. Guy of Burgundy, William's cousin, was sent to William's court in hopes he would do well there. William gave Guy castles at Brionne and Vernon. But Guy wasn't happy with this and decided he should rule Normandy himself. He became the leader of what was by now an open revolt. Two of William's viscounts joined Guy. William realized this was a serious threat and he asked King Henry for help. The French king came right away and brought a large army. The combined armies of Duke William and King Henry met the rebels at Val-es-Dunes. The rebels were defeated and Guy fled to his castle at Brionne. William kept the castle cut off from food or supplies until Guy gave up in 1049. The duke forgave his cousin, but Guy soon returned to Burgundy. William's victory at Val-es-Dunes gave him some control of Normandy.\nA church council met in October 1047 near the battlefield to consider a new Truce of God. No private wars would be allowed from Wednesday evening through Monday morning. Also no such fighting was allowed during Advent, Lent, Easter and Pentecost. This followed other such truces in place elsewhere in France. But the king and duke were both excluded from this truce. They were allowed to wage war during these times to keep the peace. William's peace in Normandy was now supported by the church.\nRise to power.\nThe battle of Val-es-Dunes was the start of William's rise to power. As the king had stepped in it was more his victory than William's. But William's nobles now began to see him as a leader. He could now think about taking a wife. Shortly before 1049 William decided to marry Matilda of Flanders. She was the daughter of Baldwin V of Flanders and Adela of France, who was the daughter of King Robert II of France. Before it could take place Pope Leo IX refused to allow the marriage. He did not give a reason but the two were cousins. Some time between 1050 and 1052 the two married anyway. But it wasn't until 1059 that another pope, Nicholas II, lifted the ban on their marriage.\nWhile William was building his power in Normandy things were changing around him. King Henry had supported him and William had helped the king against the count of Anjou. About 1052 Count Geoffrey of Anjou and the king suddenly made peace. Just as suddenly the king turned on William. At the same time two of William's uncles, Archbishop Mauger and Count William of Arques rebelled against their nephew. William fought his uncle at the castle at Arques. King Henry now led a large force (army) into Normandy to help Count William of Arques. But Duke William met him in battle and won. Without the king's army to help, the castle had to give up. Duke William sent his two uncles away from Normandy.\nIn 1054 the king again entered Normandy with a large hostile force. He split his army in two and led the southern forces himself. His brother Odo led the second force east of the Seine river. This time William had all of Normandy supporting him. He had everything that could be used as food removed ahead of the French armies. This would cause them difficulty in keeping their soldiers fed. William also split his soldiers into two armies. William's forces watched the king's armies looking for any chance to attack. When Odo's forces reached the town of Mortimer they found plenty of food and drink. This caused his forces to relax and enjoy themselves. The commanders of William's second army caught them by surprise and killed most of Odo's soldiers. Those who did survive were taken prisoner and held for ransom. When the king got the news that his brother's army had been destroyed his army was struck with panic. The king and his men left Normandy as fast as they could. King Henry I agreed to a peace that lasted three years. But in 1058 the king broke the peace and invaded Normandy again. Just as before William kept the king's army close but waited for the best time to strike. This came as the French army was crossing the Dives river at Varaville. The king had already crossed the river and watched as his army was destroyed as they entered the water. He took what remained of his army and left Normandy for good. The king died a short time later. The new king, his young son Phillip, was under the care of William's father-in-law, Baldwin V. France was no longer hostile to Normandy and this allowed William the freedom to expand.\nNormandy and England.\nIn 1002 Ethelred King of England married Emma, sister of Duke Richard II of Normandy. The alliance formed by this marriage had far reaching effects. When Canute came to the throne of England in 1016, he took Emma of Normandy as his wife. Her two sons by her former marriage fled to Normandy for their own safety. Edward, the older son, stayed in Normandy for many years at the court of the dukes. The last duke who protected him there was his cousin William. Edward became King of England in 1042. in 1052 Edward made William his heir. In 1065 Harold Godwinson was in Normandy. While he was there he promised Duke William he would support him as successor to the English throne. On 5 January 1066 Edward the king died. But Harold did not respect his oaths. The next day, the day of the funeral, Harold Godwinson was crowned King of England. The story was that on his deathbed, the king had changed his mind, and promised Harold the throne. Harold was not royalty himself and had no legal claim on the throne. For weeks William must have known Edward was dying. But the news of the king's death and Harold's taking the throne must have been a surprise to others.\nNorman invasion of England.\nPrelude.\nWilliam began his plans for invasion almost as soon as he received news of the events in England. He called a meeting of his greatest men. William made plans to gather a large army from all over France. His influence and wealth meant he could mount a large campaign. His first task was to build a fleet of ships to carry his army across the English Channel. Then he started gathering an army. His friendship with Brittany, France, and Flanders meant he did not have to rely only on his own army. He hired and paid soldiers from many parts of Europe. William asked for and got the support of the pope who gave him a banner to carry into battle. At the same time Duke William was planning his invasion, so too was Harold Hardrada. The king of England knew both would be coming but he kept his ships and forces in the south of England where William might land. \nWilliam may have had as many as 1,000 ships in his invasion fleet. They had favorable winds to leave Normandy on the night of 27 September 1066. William's ship, the Mora, was a gift of his wife, Matilda. It led the fleet to the landing at Pevensey the next morning. As soon as he landed William got news of King Harold's victory over the Norwegian king at Stamford Bridge in the north of England. Harold also received news that William had landed at Pevensey and came south as quickly as he could. The king rested at London for a few days before taking his army to meet William and his French forces.\nBattle of Hastings.\nKing Harold's army took up a position on an east-west ridge north of Hastings. The ridge itself was called Senlay Hill. They found the Norman army marching up the valley in front of them. While Harold had more soldiers, they were tired from the forced march from London. William formed his lines at the base of the hill facing the shield wall of the English. He sent his archers halfway up the slope to attack the English. He sent his mounted knights to the left and right to find any weak spots. At first William's knights tried to break through the shield wall with the weight of their horses. But they were attacking uphill and could not gain any speed. Harold's front line simply stood fast and was able to fend off any attacks. William's army began to fall back with rumors of Duke William's death. William removed his helmet so his men could see he was still alive. When William saw that many of Harold's men were following his knights back down the hill he used a trick he had learned years before. He turned suddenly and charged the oncoming English foot soldiers who had no chance against mounted knights.\nThis tactic worked at least two more times during the battle and made Harold's shield wall weaker. Now William used something new. Where his attacks by knights and soldiers had been separate movements he now used them together. Where his archers had not succeeded against the shield wall he had them shoot high into the air so the arrows came down on top of the English. This may be where king Harold was killed by an arrow through his eye. The shield wall finally broke and the Normans were on top of them. By nightfall the English were either dead on the field or being hunted down by William's troops. William called his troops back and they all spent the night camped on the battlefield.\nAftermath.\nThe battle was won but the English still had smaller armies which had not joined King Harold at Hastings. They had lost their king but were still trying to reorganize. William rested his army for five days before moving towards London. His line of march took him through several towns he either captured or destroyed. When William reached London the English resisted for a short time but in the end surrendered. On Christmas day in 1066 William was crowned King of England. His victory at Hastings gave Duke William the nickname he has been known by ever since: 'William the Conqueror'.\nKing of England.\nEarly reign.\nWilliam chose to be crowned at Christmas. This was partly because he thought the English would be less likely to riot at this high feast day. It was also a good choice because he believed it was God's will he be king. Now the king, William spent a few months in England. He then returned to Normandy leaving England in the hands of two capable men. These were his half-brother Odo, the Bishop of Bayeux and William FitzOsbern. Odo was made the Earl of Kent while FitzOsbern became the earl of Hereford. The remaining three English earls were left in place. When William sailed back to Normandy with him were many of his followers. Many of his soldiers who had been paid and others he wished to keep track of. In particular these were the English Archbishop Stigand and Edgar Atheling. He also brought his remaining three English earls, Edwin, Morcar and Waltheof. This was so none of them could start a revolt while he was away. William had his duties at home to take care of. Also many of his soldiers needed to come back to keep the duchy safe.\nWhen William returned to London in December of 1067 he began to find out what problems had come up while he was gone. Hertfordshire had been raided by Mercians. Then Exeter had not accepted the rule of the new king. William raised money from all those parts of England that would pay. He also called out English levies. Exeter surrendered after one of its hostages was blinded. After he subdued Devon and Cornwall all seemed quiet. At Winchester William sent for his wife Matilda who was crowned Queen of England there at Pentecost.\nBy summer more rebellions had broken out. At the same time others were fleeing England. Edgar Atheling along with his mother and sisters left for Scotland where they were welcomed. In the North strong anti-Norman groups were gathering around York. Earl Edwin and his brother Morcar left William's court to join the rebels in the north. William then built a castle at Warwick. This caused the Earls and others to give in to William. Other castles followed. William then entered York where others came to him and submitted. He then negotiated with the king of Scots to prevent any invasions of England from the north. But his campaign in the North was not as effective as he thought. In 1069 a second uprising developed into a war. The men William left in charge had been killed. A small Norman force was holding out in York when William came to their aid. After building another castle William left Earl William FitzOsbern in charge. For the next five months the north was quiet. But the northern English leaders had sent word to King Swein in Denmark offering him the crown if he could defeat the Normans. Swein sent a Danish fleet to England. \nIn the summer of 1069 the Danish fleet appeared off the coast of Kent. It moved up the coast towards the north, raiding as it went. William and his army were in the south guarding against any incursions. Finally the fleet joined the English rebels on the banks of the River Humber. The remaining English earls all deserted William and joined the combined English-Danish forces. They moved against the Norman garrison at York and killed all but a few women and children. William Malet, a Norman who had lived in England before 1066 was also spared.\nHarrying of the north.\nWilliam's northern army was wiped out and York was in ruins. At the same time smaller rebellions were breaking out in Wales and southwest England. William knew he was in trouble. He began by calling in all his commanders and troops to combine his forces. The king knew that with a smaller army he had to deal with one group of rebels at a time. He sent William FitzOsbern and Brian of Brittany to deal with Exeter. William himself fought an army moving in from the east. In both cases the Norman armies were victorious. He now moved on the northern armies that had destroyed York. But he was unable to get any farther north than Pontefract. After trying for several weeks William bribed the Danish Fleet to withdraw from York for the winter. They agreed and returned to the mouth of the Humber to winter there. William was now able to move up to York. He rebuilt the castles there. He then had his forces spread out and destroy everything useful for the English and Danish army to feed itself. The result was widespread famine and the people of the area either left or starved to death. This was William's infamous harrying of the North. The result of all this was the surrender of his English Earls and most of the rebels in England. The few remaining groups were quickly crushed by William's army. But one group proved more stubborn. This was at Chester and after a forced march during Winter, William surprised them before they were ready. After their surrender he built two more castles there then returned to Winchester.\nRuling England and Normandy.\nWilliam never again had to lay waste to a county as he did to Yorkshire. He had dealt with the main threats to his rule but some had only been solved in part. The Danish fleet came back in 1070 this time led by King Swen. They joined a small group of rebels on the Isle of Ely led by Hereward the Wake. Again William bribed the Danes to leave and then dealt with the rebels. Hereward was never heard from again.\nWilliam now had to rule both England and Normandy. He found he had to be present to keep things under control. When he was in Normandy trouble often broke out in England. When in England, though, Normandy was being ruled by his wife Matilda. But Fulk Rechin, the new count of Anjou, had taken Maine from William's control. William had to take it back in 1073.\nIn 1082 William arrested his half-brother Odo, Bishop of Bayeux and Earl of Kent. The reasons are uncertain but Odo was trying to raise an army to march on Rome. His plan was to become the next Pope. William put him on trial on the Isle of Wight. In addition to other crimes was that of trying to raise an army among William's soldiers. As William pointed out, they were needed for the defense of England. Odo protested that not even a king could judge him. As a bishop only the Pope could. William replied that he wasn't seizing a bishop, he was seizing his earl who he left in charge during his absence. Odo was imprisoned in Normandy for the rest of his life.\nIn 1083 Queen Matilda died and was buried in Caen. The two had been very close and only disagreed over their son Robert Curthose. Robert had repeatedly rebelled against his father yet kept in contact with his mother. This caused a rift between them. Philip I of France had found it difficult for his vassal to become a king like himself and so resented William. Not strong enough to fight William himself, when Robert Curthose rebelled against his father, King Philip helped him.\nIn the summer of 1085 William learned that Canute IV of Denmark was getting a fleet ready to sail against England. William came back to England in the Autumn with many soldiers. He had to pay them and feed them, at great cost. It may have been at this time he realized he had no records of what was owed him as king. He didn't know if he was collecting all the taxes that were due.\nDomesday Book.\nAt his Christmas court at Gloucester in 1085 William asked that a great survey be taken in every part of England. The king wanted to know how many people lived in his realm. He wanted to know the size of every property, what each was worth, and how much income it brought in. No such survey had ever been made in England before. It was unique in its details and its contribution to English history. The Domesday Book was the first public record in England.\nThe text of the book fit into two volumes. The first covered thirty-one counties. It was called 'Great Domesday' because of its size. The second covered the counties of Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk and was called 'Little Domesday'. The facts were recorded by several panels made up of bishops and earls. Each panel collected information on several counties. William was presented with a large collection of written records on 1 August 1086. This became the Domesday Book, though it wouldn't be bound into books for almost another century.\nLast years.\nWilliam died when he was in Rouen, France from injuries he had received from falling off a horse he owned. \nFamily.\nWilliam and his wife Matilda of Flanders had at least nine children."}
{"id": "5569", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5569", "title": "Matilda of Flanders", "text": "Matilda of Flanders (c. 1031 - November 2, 1083) was the wife of William I of England. She was Duchess of Normandy and Queen of England.\nEarly life.\nMatilda was the daughter of Baldwin V of Flanders and Adela of France, who was the daughter of king Robert II of France. Historians think she was born about 1031. Care was given to her education so she would become known for her learning as much as for her great beauty. Matilda, like other princesses of her day, was very skilled at fine needlework. Matilda was well respected because she was a part of a large Royal family. She was related to many kings in Europe including Charlemagne. Matilda was a very small woman in size, some reports said she was only four feet two inches high (129.5 Centimeters).\nDuchess of Normandy.\nMatilda was married to William probably between 1051 and 1052 while she was still a teenager. Ever since he became duke of Normandy as a boy, William had to fight to keep Normandy. When William was born his mother and father were not married so he had the stigma of being a bastard. By marrying Matilda, who was the niece of the king of France, William gained respect in Europe.\nWhen William was getting ready to attack England, Matilda had a ship built for him called the \"Mora\". While William was in England and after he became King of England in 1066, Matilda stayed behind to rule Normandy while William was away. \nQueen of England.\nA year later, in 1067, Matilda was able to join her husband in England and she was crowned Queen of England. It helped William that Matilda was related to an earlier English king, Alfred the Great. This was important to the English people to think Matilda was herself part English. Matilda died on 3 Nov 1083 when she was about 52 years old.\nFamily.\nTogether they had ten children, including:"}
{"id": "5571", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5571", "title": "Robert II of France", "text": "Robert II of France (March 27, 972 - July 20, 1031) was born in Orleans, France. He was the son of Hugh Capet and Adelaide of Aquitaine. He was married to Constance of Arles. \nRobert was succeeded by his son Henry I of France. Robert is buried in the Saint Denis Basilica."}
{"id": "5573", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5573", "title": "Hugh Capet", "text": ""}
{"id": "5574", "revid": "6069076", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5574", "title": "Adelaide of Aquitaine", "text": "Adelaide of Aquitaine (c.945-1004) was the Queen of Hugh Capet and the daughter of William III of Aquitaine. She was the sister of William IV of Aquitaine."}
{"id": "5576", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5576", "title": "William III of Aquitaine", "text": "William III of Aquitaine (c. 915 \u2013 April 3, 963) became the Duke of Aquitaine and Count of Poitiers in 935. He was the son of Ebalus of Aquitaine.\nWilliam's nickname was \"Towhead\".\nWilliam was married to Adela of Normandy. He was the father of Adelaide of Aquitaine, who became Queen of France when she married Hugh Capet. He was succeeded by his son, William IV of Aquitaine."}
{"id": "5577", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5577", "title": "Basilica of Saint-Denis", "text": "The Basilica of Saint-Denis is a basilica near Paris, France. It is famous for its architecture and as the burial place for many Kings of France. It is in the suburb of Saint Denis, which is in the north of Paris. Since 1966, it is the cathedral of the diocese of Saint-Denis. It is located in the Greater Paris area, about from Paris.\nThe Basilica is named after Saint Denis. Saint Denis is the patron saint of France. He was also the first Bishop of Paris.\nThe Basilica was a Romanesque building. In 1136 the Abbot Suger (1081 - 1155) began replacing the building, bit by bit, beginning with the west front and then with a new east end. The east end is said to be the first building in the Gothic style. It was not completed until the 13th century.\nThe current organ of the basilica is the first organ built by Aristide Cavaille-Coll. With 4200 pipes, it contains a lot of innovations, opening the romantic area. The French organist Pierre Pincemaille, titular between 1987 and 2018, set up lots of recitals and recorded 8 CDs with this instrument."}
{"id": "5578", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5578", "title": "Gothic architecture", "text": "Gothic architecture is a way of planning and designing buildings that developed in Western Europe in the Late Middle Ages. Gothic architecture grew out of Romanesque architecture, in France in the 12th century. Gothic architecture spread across Europe and lasted until the 16th century when Renaissance architecture became popular. \nThe important single feature of Gothic architecture is the pointed arch, which is the main difference from Romanesque architecture which had rounded arches. Other important features are the ribbed vault, flying buttress, and windows with patterns of stone lace called tracery. \nMany of the great cathedrals, abbeys and churches of Europe are Gothic architecture. It is also the architecture of many castles, palaces, town halls, universities, and also some houses.\nMany church buildings still remain from this time. Even the smallest Gothic churches are often very beautiful, while many of the larger Gothic churches and cathedrals are thought to be priceless works of art. Many are listed with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as World Heritage Sites.\nIn the 19th century, the Gothic style became popular again, particularly for building churches and universities. This style is called Gothic Revival architecture.\nAbout the word \"Gothic\".\nGothic architecture was at first called \"the French Style\" (\").\nThe word \"Gothic\"\" was used later during the Renaissance as an insult, relating to the uncivilized ancient Goths, Germanic-people documented living near lower Vistula river.\nAn Italian writer named Giorgio Vasari used the word \"Gothic\" in the 1530s, because he thought buildings from the Middle Ages were not carefully planned and measured like Renaissance buildings or the buildings of ancient Rome. He said that, as the barbaric Goths had destroyed the classical world, so this \"modern art\" had destroyed the architecture of the twelfth century. After Vasari, many other people used the word \"Gothic\" to describe architecture with pointed arches.\nBackground.\nTowns, states and countries.\nAt the end of the 12th century, Western Europe was divided into different states. Many of these were beginning to become the countries that exist today. \nThe Holy Roman Empire ruled a big part of Europe including the modern countries of Germany, The Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Austria, eastern France and much of northern Italy, apart from Venice. Emperor Charlemagne began the Holy Roman Empire in 800 AD.\nThe modern countries of France and Spain were each divided into different kingdoms. England was ruled by a king whose family also had a lot of land in France. Norway was influenced by England, while the other Scandinavian countries and Poland were influenced by German states.\nTrade between towns and states began to make the towns grow larger. Germany, Holland and Belgium had many big towns that grew peacefully, often trading with each other. Because of the peace and wealth of these towns, they showed their pride by building huge town halls, often with very tall towers.\nIn England and France, most people did not live in towns. They lived on farms. Rich nobleman or lord owned these farms. The house of the lord was called a manor house. Italy was mostly split up into small city states which often fought each other. Cities often had high walls and many of the houses built at this time were tall, high towers.\nThe Church.\nIn Western Europe, in the Middle Ages, almost everyone belonged to the Roman Catholic Church. The Roman Catholic Church has one head - the Pope. During the Middle Ages, one language was used in churches all across Europe - Ecclesiastical Latin, sometimes called Church Latin, which had developed from ancient Latin. \nThe churches of each area had a local bishop who came under the Pope. . Each Bishop had a throne where he could sit when priests and people came to him. A church which has a Bishop's throne is called a \"cathedral\". Cathedrals were usually the biggest and most beautiful churches.\nIn the early Middle Ages, many monasteries were built all over Europe. A group of holy men lived and worked and prayed there. Monks belonged to different \"orders\" which had different rules. The biggest number of monasteries were homes to the monks of the Benedictine Order. Their monasteries were generally in towns and they often built very big churches called \"Abbeys\" for the monks and the townspeople to worship in. Other orders of monks, like the Cistercians, did not live near towns. Nowadays their abbeys are seen as beautiful ruins in the English countryside.\nIn France, there were also Benedictines, as well as Cluniac Orders. The great monastery at Cluny, built in the Romanesque style, was the biggest in Europe. The abbey and other buildings were very well planned so for hundreds of years other monasteries were influenced by that plan.\nIn the 13th century St. Francis of Assisi started the Franciscans, who were often called the \"Grey Friars\" because of their grey-brown robes. The Dominicans were founded by St. Dominic in Toulouse and Bologna. The Dominicans built many of Italy's Gothic churches.\nAbbot Suger and the first Gothic building.\nAbbot Suger was the head of a large monastery just north of Paris in France. The monastery had a large church, the Abbey of Saint-Denis. There was also a royal palace where the French kings sometimes stayed. Abbot Suger was a close friend to two kings, Louis VI and Louis VII.\nIn 1127 Suger decided to rebuild the great abbey Church of Saint-Denis. He began by changing the \"West Front\" or facade This side of the church was about 200 years old and had only one small door. Suger planned for three big doors like the arches on the Arch of Constantine in Rome. These large entrances let in all the crowds on special Holy Days. The facade also had a big round window in the centre, called a rose window, which was the first one in France.\nAbbot Suger did not rebuild the church inside the west doors where most of the ordinary people stood. Next, he rebuilt the eastern end. Suger wanted the east facade to make people think of Heaven. He wanted it to be very light and bright, with very big windows of beautifully coloured glass. He looked at all the most modern designs, and all the clever things that other architects had done. He put all the new ideas together in one building. It was the first building of the new \"Gothic\" style. It was not yet called Gothic at this time. It was called \"the French Style\".\nThe new East End was dedicated or \"given to God\" on June 11, 1144. Other architects soon copied the design for other big churches and cathedrals in northern France. After Abbot Suger's death, the rest of the church was also rebuilt in the new style, and got two more much larger and more decorated rose windows, one on either side.\nThe style soon spread to England and through France, the Low Countries, Germany, Spain and northern of Italy and Sicily.\nArchitectural features of Gothic churches.\nNote:- The architectural vocabulary words are written in bold type and are explained and/or shown on the plan and cross-section.\nRomanesque architecture.\n\"Romanesque\" was the style of architecture in Europe before the \"Gothic\" style. Gothic architecture grew out of Romanesque architecture. There was not a clean break between the two styles. Many of the features of Gothic architecture did not begin in the Gothic period. They were already there in Romanesque architecture, and slowly changed to become Gothic. The main changes were the pointed arch and the flying buttress. These two developments allowed many other changes to happen. \nRomanesque buildings had thick walls, small windows, round arches and flat buttresses. Gothic buildings had thinner walls, larger windows, pointed arches and large buttresses. \nAll the types of buildings, and the general shape of the buildings were already there in the Romanesque period. The types of buildings were:- the cathedral church, the parish church, the monastery, the castle, the palace, the great hall and the gatehouse.\nBefore the 20th century, the landmark building in almost every town was a church, cathedral, abbey, or town hall with its tall tower or spire rising high above all the houses. Many of these buildings were from the Middle Ages and were Romanesque or Gothic in style.\nPlans.\nThe groundplan of most Gothic churches is shaped like a cross. The long nave makes the body of the church and, crossing it, the arms are called the transept. On the other side of the \"transept\" is the chancel which is often called the choir because that is where the priest and the choir sing the services.\nThe \"nave\" usually has a passageway or aisle on either side. Sometimes there are two \"aisles\" on each side. The \"nave\" is usually a lot taller than the \"aisles\", and has high windows which light up the central space. The upper part of the building, where these windows are, is called the clerestory (or clear storey). (It is pronounced \"clair-rest-tree\")\nSome Gothic churches in Germany and Austria and also Milan Cathedral (which was built in the German style) often have \"nave\" and \"aisles\" of almost the same height and are called \"hallenkirke\" (hall church). The Cathedral of St. Stephen of Vienna is an example.\nIn some churches with double aisles, like Notre Dame, Paris, the transept does not stick out beyond the aisles. In English cathedrals the \"transepts\" always stick out a long way and sometimes there are two transepts as at Salisbury Cathedral.\nIt is at the eastern end that Gothic churches are the most different from each other.\nIn England the eastern end it is usually long and often has two parts. It is usually square or has a \"Lady Chapel\", a place to pray to the Virgin Mary.\nIn France the eastern end is often polygonal and has by a passage for walking called an ambulatory. Often French churches have a ring of chapels called a chevette. German churches are often like those of France at the eastern end.\nIn Italy, there is no long \"chancel\" jutting out beyond the transept. There is usually just a semicircular chapel as at Florence Cathedral.\nGrand facade.\nThe \"facade\" or West Front of a large church or cathedral is designed to make a big impression on the worshippers. One of the best known is Notre Dame de Paris.\nIn the centre of the facade is the main door or portal, often with two side doors as well. In the arch of the middle door is often an important piece of sculpture, usually \"Christ in Majesty\". Sometimes there is a stone post in the middle of the doorway where there is a statue of the \"Madonna and Child\". There are many other carved figures in niches set all around the portals. Sometimes there are hundreds of stone figures carved all across the front of the building.\nAbove the middle door there is a large window, which is usually a rose window like that at Reims Cathedral, but not in England, Scotland, Belgium or Scandinavia where there will nearly always be a very large pointed window to let in lots of light.\nIn Italy, the facade is often decorated with coloured marble and mosaic made of little coloured tiles, and not so many statues, as at Orvieto Cathedral\nThe \"facade\" of a French cathedral and many English, Spanish and German cathedrals usually has two towers.\nHeight.\nLarge Gothic churches and cathedrals are often very tall. On the inside, the \"nave\" is usually at least twice as high as it is wide, which gives the church a very tall narrow look. Some of the churches in France and Germany have naves that are three times as high as they are wide. Cologne Cathedral is an example. The tallest nave is at Beauvais Cathedral which is 157.5 feet high. Westminster Abbey is 102 feet high.\nOn the outside most Gothic churches, both big and small, have at least one tower. In Italy there are domes on the churches, and the tower stands to one side. But in most other countries, cathedrals generally have two towers and quite often have three. Some have even more. Laon Cathedral was planned to have seven, but they were not all built.\nSometimes there is just one tower with a huge spire as at Salisbury. Lincoln Cathedral had the tallest spire of the Middle Ages at 527 feet (160 metres).\nBecause a pointed arch points upwards, it makes people look upwards. In Gothic architecture, the whole building is designed to make people look up. There are long narrow columns, long narrow windows and high pointed roofs. On the inside the arches of the roof rise up like branches. On the outside, there are often lots of fancy bits along the edge of the roof and on the tops of buttresses and above the windows. These are called \" pinnacles\". Milan Cathedral has hundreds of them.\nLight.\nGothic architecture usually has a lot of windows. Sainte Chapelle is a famous example. At Gloucester Cathedral in England, the East window is as big as a tennis court. Milan Cathedral also has windows of about the same size.\nThe flying buttresses which arch across the roof of the aisle were used to support the roof above the windows, so the walls did not have to be so thick.\nThe columns of the inside, the ribs of the vault (or roof) and the flying buttresses, made a strong stone skeleton. in between these parts, the walls and the filling of the vaults could be of lighter thinner material. Between the narrow buttresses, the walls could be opened up into large windows.\nThrough the Gothic period, because of the pointed arch, Gothic windows were able to change from simple openings to very rich designs. The windows were very often filled with stained glass which made coloured light in the building, and was used for story-telling pictures.\nThe pointed arch.\nPointed arches were used in Persian architecture, and from 641 AD onwards, they were a feature of Islamic architecture. Knowledge of the pointed arch spread into Europe through the Crusaders who travelled to the Middle East from 1096 onwards. Also, Islamic forces had taken over parts of Spain, where they built cities and Mosques with pointed arches.\nArchitectural historians think that the pointed arch was also used by some European architects because it was a very strong way of making an arch.\nIn Gothic Architecture, the pointed arch is used in every place where an arch is needed, both for strength and for decoration. Gothic openings such as doorways, windows, arcades and galleries have pointed arches. A row of arches is called an arcade. A row of arches that is up high on a building is a gallery.\nRows of pointed arches were used to decorate walls. This is known as blind arcading. Often walls were made with tall narrow arched openings in them that could be used to stand statues in. An opening like this is called a niche which is pronounced \"neesh\".\nVaulted roofs with pointed arches.\nAn arched roof built of bricks or stone is called a vault. In the Romanesque period before the Gothic, some churches had vaulted roofs. They were always based on perfectly semi-circular shapes. There were two main ways to make a nave vault in the Romanesque period. A vault could be long like a tunnel. Churches with this type of vault were always rather dark. Or it could be square, like two tunnels crossing each other. This meant that the columns that carried the vault always had to be placed on a perfectly square ground plan, which was not always possible.\nOne of the good things about pointed arches was that they could be narrow and tall, or flattened and wide. Using pointed arches, architects could make vaults of very different shapes. They did not even have to be rectangular. A Gothic architect could make a vault with one side narrow, two sides wide and the last side even wider. They could make a vault with three sides or five sides quite easily, by using pointed arches.\nThe vaults were made of ribs which met each other at the highest part of the vault. In between the ribs were sloping surfaces of stone or brick that could be much thinner and lighter than the ribs. At first the pattern made by the ribs was quite plain, like Romanesque vaults, but architects, particularly in England, soon started adding small ribs in between the main ones and making different patterns. Some vaults like this can also be seen in Spain and Germany, but not usually in France or Italy.\nDifferent shapes of Gothic arches.\nIn the Gothic period the shape and style of pointed arches changed. But the changes were not the same in every country.\nWith pointed arches, windows could be made very large. Architects made many designs of pointed arches crossing each other in different ways. These designs were often used in windows, which look as if they are filled with beautiful stone lace. This is called \"tracery\". The stone tracery was used to hold the glass in place. An Architectural Historian can often tell just how old a part of a building is by looking at the window tracery design.\nLancet arch.\nThe simplest Gothic arch is a long opening with a pointed arch known in England as the lancet. A \"lancet\" is a sharp knife, so these windows are knife-shaped. Very often lancet windows are put together in a group of three or five.\nSalisbury Cathedral is famous for the beauty of its Lancet Gothic Architecture. In England the style is called \"Early English Gothic\". York Cathedral in England has a group of five lancet windows that are 50 feet high and are still full of ancient glass. They are called the Five Sisters.\nThese simple windows are also found at Chartres Cathedral and Laon Cathedral in France. They are the most usual sort of Gothic windows in Italy.\nEquilateral arch.\nMany Gothic openings have tops that are based upon an equilateral triangle. The Equilateral Arch has a very pleasing look and gives a wide opening useful for doorways, arcades and big windows.\nThese arches are often filled with tracery in circular designs. In England this style is called Geometric Decorated Gothic. It can be seen at many English and French Cathedrals, for example Lincoln cathedral in England and Notre Dame in Paris.\nFlamboyant arch.\nSome Gothic windows have designs in the tracery, or even in the top of the window itself, that rises up like a flame. This is called Flamboyant Gothic. Tracery like this makes a very rich and lively effect.\nSome of the most beautiful and famous windows of Europe have this type of tracery. It can be seen at St Stephen's Vienna, Sainte Chapelle in Paris, at the Cathedrals of Limoges and Rouen in France, and at Milan Cathedral in Italy. In England the most famous windows like this are the West Window of York Minster with its design based on the Sacred Heart, the East Window at Carlisle Cathedral and the East window of Selby Abbey. Architectural Historians sometimes argue about which of these is the most beautiful.\nFlame-shaped arches are not as strong as ordinary pointed arches. It is never used for making a vaulted roof. If this shape is used to make a doorway, there is generally another stronger arch around it. Another way is to make a square topped door that has Flamboyant decoration over the top. In France there are many doorways, both in churches and in houses, that are like this. They are rare in England but there is one at Rochester Cathedral.\nIn England the Flamboyant style was used wall arcading and niches. The most famous examples in are in the Lady Chapel at Ely, the Screen at Lincoln and the facade of Exeter Cathedral. In German and Spanish Gothic architecture the Flamboyant style is often used for opnwork stone screens. The famous \"pulpit\" in Vienna Cathedral is made like this.\nDepressed arch.\nThe Depressed arch is wide and looks as if it has been pushed almost flat. When arches like this are used to make great big windows they need to be supported by many tall thin vertical shafts and horizontal transoms, so that the window looks as if it has been divided up into a grid (lots of rectangles). This sort of decoration is used on walls as well. In England the style is called Perpendicular Gothic style.\nAt Gloucester Cathedral the Perpendicular East Window is said to be as large as a tennis court. There are three very famous large chapels in this style- King's College Chapel, Cambridge; St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle; Henry VII's Chapel at Westminster Abbey. The other famous example is Bath Abbey.\nDecoration.\nA Gothic cathedral was designed to be like a model of the universe. Everything about the building was designed to tell a message about God.\nThe statues, the decoration, stained glass windows and wall paintings told Bible stories such as how God created the world and how he rules over everything that is in the universe, the seasons of the year and the stars in the sky.\nCarvings near the door often show the signs of the Zodiac because the patterns of stars in the sky were very important to farming people who did not have calendars to tell them when to plant and when to harvest.\nAbove the main door is often a sculpture of Jesus on a throne, judging the people of the Earth. Many pictures and sculptures are there to remind people to live good lives because they never know what will happen next.\nMany churches were very richly decorated, both inside and out. the statues were often painted in bright colours but nowadays only tiny bits remain at Chartres cathedral and some other places. Wooden ceilings were usually brightly coloured. Sometimes the stone columns were painted as well.\nRegional differences.\nEven though some things about Gothic architecture stay the same, other things look different in different countries.\nBuilding materials.\nDifferent building materials were found in different parts of Europe. This is one of the differences in the architecture between different places.\nIn France, there was limestone. It was good for building because it was soft to cut, but got much harder when the air and rain got on it. It was usually a pale grey colour. France also had beautiful white limestone from Caen which was perfect for making very fine carvings.\nEngland had coarse limestone, red sandstone and dark green Purbeck marble which was often used for architectural decorations like thin columns.\nIn Northern Germany, Netherlands, Denmark, Baltic countries and northern Poland there was no good building stone, but there was clay for making bricks and tiles. So many of these countries have Brick Gothic churches and even Brick Gothic castles.\nIn Italy, limestone was used for city walls and castles, but brick was used for other buildings. Because Italy had lots of beautiful marble in many different colours, many buildings have fronts or \"facades\" decorated in coloured marble. Some churches have very rough brick \"facades\" because the marble was never put on. Florence Cathedral, for example, did not get its marble \"facade\" until the 1800s.\nIn some parts of Europe, there were many tall straight trees that were good for making very large roofs. But in England, by the 1400s, the long straight trees were running out. Many of the trees were used for building ships. The architects had to think of a new way to make a wide roof from short pieces of timber. That is how they invented the hammer-beam roofs which are one of the beautiful features seen in many old English churches.\nFrance.\nFrench cathedrals, and those in Germany and Belgium are often very high, both inside and outside. \"The transepts\" do not stick out far. The \"facades\" in France nearly always have three doors, a rose window and two towers. There are often \"facades\" with doors on the transepts as well as the front.\nEngland.\nThe thing that makes English cathedrals different from the others is that they are long, and look horizontal, like big ocean liners.\nEnglish cathedrals nearly all took hundreds of years to build, and every part is in a style that is quite different to the next part. (Only Salisbury Cathedral was not built in lots of styles.)\nThe West window is very large and is never a rose window. The west front may have two towers like a French Cathedral, or none. There is nearly always a tower at the middle of the building, which may have a big spire.\nGermany and the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn Germany the towers and spires are often enormously large. Sometimes they are so big that it was impossible to finish them until modern times. The spires are quite different to English spires because they are made of lacy \"openwork\".\nThere are also many \"hallenkirke\" (or hall-churches) which have no \"clerestorey\" windows. The nave and the aisles are about the same height.\nSpain and Portugal.\nLike an English Cathedral, a Spanish or Portuguese Gothic Cathedral is often built in many different styles. They are often wide. Spanish cathedrals often have chapels all around them. The roof often has many different types of towers and spires. Often the central towers are polygonal.\nItaly.\nItalian Gothic cathedrals use lots of colour, both outside and inside. On the outside, the \"facade\" is often decorated with marble. On the inside, the walls are often painted plaster. The columns and arches are often decorated with bright coloured paint. There are also mosaics with gold backgrounds and beautifully tiled floors is geometric patterns.\nThe facades often have an open porch with a wheel windows above it. There is often a dome at the centre of the building. The bell tower is hardly ever attached to the building, because Italy has quite a few earthquakes. The windows are not as large as in northern Europe and, although stained glass windows are often found, the favorite way of decorating the churches is fresco (wall painting)."}
{"id": "5579", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5579", "title": "Cathedral", "text": "A cathedral is a Christian church that is the seat of a Bishop. As cathedrals are the seat of a bishop, they are central church of a diocese. Only those Christian denominations that have bishops have cathedrals. Cathedrals can be found in the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Anglican as well as some Lutheran churches. \nIn the Greek Orthodox Church, the terms \"kathedrikos naos\" (literally: \"cathedral shrine\") and \"metropolis\" (literally \"mother city\") are both used to describe the same thing. \"Metropolis\" is more common, but both terms are officially used.\nThere are variations on the use of the term \"cathedral\"; for example, some pre-Reformation cathedrals in Scotland now within the Church of Scotland still retain the term cathedral, despite the Church's Presbyterian polity which does not have bishops. As cathedrals are often particularly impressive buildings, the term is often used incorrectly to refer to any large important church. Some diocese, however, have other churches that are bigger than the cathedral.\nSeveral cathedrals in Europe, such as Strasbourg, and in England at York, Lincoln and Southwell, are referred to as \"Minster\" (German: \"M\u00fcnster\") churches, from Latin \"monasterium\", because the establishments were served by canons living in community or may have been an abbey, prior to the Reformation. The other kind of great church in Western Europe is the abbey.\nDefinition.\nThe word cathedral is derived from the Latin noun \"cathedra\" (\"seat\" or \"chair\"), and refers to the presence of the bishop's or archbishop's chair or throne. In the ancient world, the chair was the symbol of a teacher and thus of the bishop's role as teacher, and also of an official presiding as a magistrate and thus of the bishop's role in governing a diocese.\nThe word cathedral, though now grammatically used as a noun, is originally the adjective in the phrase \"cathedral church\", from the Latin \"ecclesia cathedralis\". The seat marks the place set aside in the prominent church of the diocese for the head of that diocese and is therefore a major symbol of authority.\nMany cathedrals are very old.\nCathedrals which are not the seat of a bishop.\nSome churches are called \"cathedral\", but they are not the seat of a bishop. This may be because the way the church is organised changed over time. This is the case for Our Lady of Sorrows Church, Poprad, in Slovakia, for example. In Slovak language, this church is called \"cathedral\". It is part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Spi\u0161. This diocese was re-organised several times. Currently, the cathedral of the diocese is St. Martin's Cathedral (Spi\u0161sk\u00e1 Kapitula). Churches that formerly were a diocesan seat may be called concathedral, co-cathedral, or pro-cathedral."}
{"id": "5580", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5580", "title": "Patron saint", "text": "A patron saint is someone who has devoted their whole life to something greater than themselves. They are someone who worked hard to make the world a better place. Catholics traditionally take a name of a patron saint to help them throughout their life.\nHere is a list of patron saints and the things that they are the patron saint of:"}
{"id": "5581", "revid": "354795", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5581", "title": "Saint David", "text": "Saint David (c. 512 - 587) is the patron saint of Wales. He was a Welsh bishop in the 6th century. He is usually represented standing on a little hill, with a dove on his shoulder. He is commemorated on 1 March. The earliest mention of St. David is found in a tenth-century manuscript Of the \"Annales Cambriae\", which assigns his death to A.D. 601."}
{"id": "5582", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5582", "title": "Saint George", "text": "Saint George (c. 275/280 \u2013 April 23, 303) is the patron saint of England and some other countries. There is no reliable history about St. George yet. On St George's day some people in England wear a red rose, or put an English flag in their window. The Saint George's Cross is the flag of England: white with a red cross. \nAccording to a legend, Saint George of Lydda killed a dragon and saved the lives of many people. \nA legend.\nA city called Silene had a large lake, where a plague-bearing dragon who breathed fire and disease lived. The dragon poisoned all the countryside. To please the dragon, the people of Silene gave it a sheep every day, for food, and when there were no more sheep, they gave their children to the dragon. The children were chosen by a lottery.\nOne year the lottery chose the King's daughter. The King, sad and desperate, asked the people to take all his gold and silver, and half of his empire - but only if his daughter could be saved. The people refused. The daughter was sent out to the lake, dressed in white as a bride, to be a fine meal for the dragon.\nNot knowing this, Saint George was riding past the lake on the same day. The princess, terrified and trembling, tried to send him away, but George said he would stay and protect her.\nThe dragon came suddenly out of the lake while they were speaking. George made the Sign of the Cross gesture, jumped on his horse and advanced toward the dragon. He used his long spear to hurt the dragon badly. Then he asked the princess to throw her long pretty belt to him. He put the silk belt around the dragon's neck. \nNow, the dragon followed the girl like a humble pet follows its master. \nThe Princess and Saint George took the dragon back to the city of Silene, where the people were terrified to see the dragon enter. But Saint George told them not to be scared. He said that if the people became Christians and went to Church to be baptized, he would kill the dragon immediately.\nThe king and the people of Silene converted to Christianity, George killed the dragon with his sword, 'Ascalon', and its body was taken out of the city on carts. \nFifteen thousand men were baptized, not counting women and children. \nOn the site where the dragon died, the king built a Church for the Blessed Virgin Mary and Saint George. From the altar in the church came a fountain of holy water. The water cured any disease.\nSymbolism.\nThe story of Saint George and the Dragon symbolizes good winning over evil. Compare Book of Revelation chapters 12-13.\nIt is the subject of a lot of art through many centuries. In Sweden, the Princess symbolizes the nation of Sweden, and the dragon represents a foreign army of enemies. The story was passed from parent to child through songs in Russia. It was also made into the story 'The Reluctant Dragon' by Ken Ransom, which was made into a Disney film.\nPatron Saint.\nSt. George's Day is also England's National Day, April 23, but this is not a holiday in the UK. He is the patron saint of many other countries, too - including Greece, Palestine, Georgia, Portugal and Russia. Moscow has 41 Churches with the name of Saint George, and the Moscow city Coat of Arms, or symbol, is of Saint George on a horse killing the dragon. Saint George is the patron saint of the Boy Scouts of America."}
{"id": "5583", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5583", "title": "Saint Andrew", "text": "Saint Andrew is one of the twelve apostles of Jesus and the patron saint of Scotland, Romania, Ukraine and several other countries. He was crucified on a cross that was turned sideways to look like an \"X\". The Saint Andrew's flag is the official flag of Scotland.\nOn St Andrew's Day, many people in Scotland wear a thistle."}
{"id": "5584", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5584", "title": "Saint Patrick", "text": "Saint Patrick (about 402 - March 17, probably 491 or 493) is the patron saint of Ireland. He was born in a village in Roman Britain. Saint Patrick came from a Christian family. He was the son of Calpornius, who was a deacon. According to the autobiographical Confessio of Patrick, when he was about sixteen years old, he was captured by Irish pirates. They took him from his home in Britain and sold him as a slave in Ireland. His work was to take care of animals. He lived there for six years and learned the local language. He then escaped and returned to his family. \nAfter becoming a cleric, he returned to northern and western Ireland as a missionary. Because he knew the language he could preach to the people. He also married couples when the king prohibited it. \nHe brought Christianity to Ireland. He converted many pagans to Christianity. He also challenged many of their leaders and druids such as Aodhan the Brave also known as Chief Aodhan. St.Patrick eventually converted Chief Aodhan and they worked together to convert many other pagans. \nSt. Patrick's Day is celebrated every year on March 17 in his honour.\nSaint Patrick's Bell.\nThere is a bell in the National Museum of Ireland that was made around the time of Saint Patrick's life. There is no evidence that Saint Patrick owned the bell but the Irish have believed for 1400 years that the bell belonged to Saint Patrick. One of the kings of Ulster who was the high king of Ireland at the time had a beautiful cover made out of gold and gems to preserve the bell. The names of the bishops of Ireland were engraved on the cover. The style of the letters on the cover were used to make the first typewriters. It is believed that the bell was rung by Saint Patrick to let people know it was time for church.\nSaint Patrick and the snakes.\nThere are no snakes in Ireland but there is a legend that at the time of Saint Patrick there were lots of snakes and he chased them all into the Irish Sea. Some say that this legend came to be because pagans had tattoos of snakes and Saint Patrick got rid of the pagans by teaching Christianity and therefore drove out the snakes from Ireland."}
{"id": "5585", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5585", "title": "491", "text": ""}
{"id": "5586", "revid": "1055265", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5586", "title": "March 17", "text": ""}
{"id": "5587", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5587", "title": "402", "text": "402 is a year in the Common Era. It started on a Wednesday. It was known as year 1155 in some places in the Ab urbe condita."}
{"id": "5588", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5588", "title": "Somerset", "text": "Somerset is a county in South West England.\nThe main town of Somerset was Somerton, but it is now Taunton. There are two cities in Somerset. They are Bath and Wells.\nHistory.\nThe name \"Somerset\" comes from the Anglo-Saxon phrase \"Sumorsaete,\" which was used to describe people from Somerton.\nIn the past, the northern border of Somerset was the River Avon. However, as the city of Bristol has grown, the border moved south.\nIn 1974 parts of north Somerset, the city of Bristol and parts of south Gloucestershire were joined into a new county. This county was named Avon. In 1996 Avon was split into 4 parts, which are now unitary authorities. People usually say that 2 of these parts (named North Somerset and Bath and North East Somerset) are part of Somerset, even though they have their own councils.\nThe oldest prison in England which is still used is in a town named Shepton Mallet in Somerset. Somerset also has the world's oldest road which people built. It is called the Sweet Track; it was built in about 3800 BC.\nIndustry and tourism.\nThere is not much large industry in Somerset, but Bridgwater is a port, and Yeovil is important in building helicopters.\nTourism is an important industry in the county; in 2001 about 23,000 people worked in tourism. Tourists like Somerset because it is very beautiful, with much countryside and few big towns. Somerset has many places to visit:\nFarming is an important industry in Somerset, but not as many people work in this industry today. Somerset is famous for its cider (an alcoholic apple drink) and it has many apple orchards.\nPolitics.\nDistricts of Somerset.\nThe numbers on the map are linked to the numbers below.\nCities, towns, and villages.\nThis is a list of the main towns and cities in Somerset:"}
{"id": "5589", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5589", "title": "Glastonbury", "text": "Glastonbury is a town in Somerset, England. It is well known for the Glastonbury Festival which happens every year in Glastonbury.\nHistory.\nGlastonbury is also well-known because of Glastonbury Abbey. This is because Glastonbury Abbey is said to be the place where King Arthur is buried, and it was burned down when King Henry the Eighth got angry at all Catholic monasteries in the country as the Pope would not grant him a divorce. The abbot, Abbot Whiting, was killed on the Tor, a local landmark."}
{"id": "5590", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5590", "title": "Glastonbury Abbey", "text": "Glastonbury Abbey is in Glastonbury, Somerset, England. It was King Ine of Wessex who decided to build Glastonbury Abbey and out of stone. King Edmund I of England was buried at the Abbey in 946 AD. It is said to be the burial place of King Arthur."}
{"id": "5591", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5591", "title": "Somerton", "text": "Somerton is a town in Somerset. In 2001 there were 4509 people living in Somerton. It is between the towns of Yeovil and Street. It is in the South Somerset District of Somerset. \nSomerton was the capital of the Kingdom of Wessex from 871 to 901. It also used to be Somerset's county town, but this is now Taunton."}
{"id": "5592", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5592", "title": "Yeovil, Somerset", "text": "Yeovil is a town in the county of Somerset. It is in the South Somerset District. Yeovil takes its name from the River Yeo. \"Yeo Village\" became Yeovil over time.\nTransportation.\nThe town has two railway stations. They are called Yeovil Junction and Yeovil Pen Mill. The town has many villages near by. These are West Coker, East Chinnock, East Coker, Stoford, Evershot, Halstock and Yetminster. \nPolitics.\nYeovil is where the council is based for the district of South Somerset. The town's main employers are GKN Westlands Helicopters.\nSports.\nYeovil is home to the \"giant killer\" football club Yeovil Town F.C.. The club played against Liverpool F.C in 2004. Yeovil used to be famous for glove-making. This is why the football team are nicknamed \"The Glovers\"."}
{"id": "5593", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5593", "title": "Bridgwater", "text": "Bridgwater is a town in the county of Somerset. It is in the District of Sedgemoor."}
{"id": "5594", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5594", "title": "Street", "text": "A street is a piece of land, made flat and often with pavement, so that people can travel on it better. \"Street\" and \"road\" may mean the same thing, but \"street\" is more often used only in a town.\nMany streets are the center of local culture or of a specialized activity. New Orleans\u2019 Bourbon Street, for example, is famous for its active nightlife and also for its role as the center of the city\u2019s French Quarter. The Bowery in Manhattan was, at different times, a main highway, a center of underground punk culture, and a specialized shopping district for light fixtures."}
{"id": "5595", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5595", "title": "Taunton", "text": "Taunton is a town in the county of Somerset. It is in the Taunton Deane District. Taunton is the county town of Somerset. Taunton is on the River Tone and takes its name from the river. \"Tone town\" became Taunton.\nIn 1685, Judge Jefferies was based in Taunton during the Bloody Assizes that followed the Battle of Sedgemoor."}
{"id": "5596", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5596", "title": "Shepton Mallet", "text": "Shepton Mallet is a town in the county of Somerset, England. It is in the Mendip district.\nShepton Mallet is where the council is based for the Mendip district. It is a pleasant place to go, and has a beautiful countryside."}
{"id": "5597", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5597", "title": "Bath, Somerset", "text": "Bath is a city in the county of Somerset in England. It is west of London, and southeast of Bristol.\nBath is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city has preserved some of its Roman remains and its 18th century architecture.\nHistory.\nThe city gets its name from the famous Roman baths in the town. The Romans built the baths as part of a spa, in the year 43\u00a0BC. They called it \"Aquae Sulis\", which means \"The waters of Sulis\". Sulis was a local goddess.\nDuring the Middle Ages, it was an important city for buying and selling wool.\nBath became a city in 1585, when Queen Elizabeth I declared it to be one.\nBath has two universities and several schools and colleges.\nBath is where Roald Dahl's short story \"The Landlady\" takes place. The city is also mentioned in many of Jane Austen's books, like \"Northanger Abbey\", \"Sense and Sensibility\", and \"Pride and Prejudice.\""}
{"id": "5598", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5598", "title": "Wells", "text": "Wells is a city in the county of Somerset. It is in the district of Mendip. The only other city in Somerset is Bath. In 2001 there were 10,406 people living in Wells.\nWells Cathedral is in Wells. The cathedral is very popular with visitors to Wells.\nThe cathedral has a school attached to it. Timothy K. Murray, a composer, was a student there.\nThe city of Wells is named after springs in the grounds of the Bishop's Palace.\nIt is the second smallest city in the United Kingdom after St Davids in Wales."}
{"id": "5602", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5602", "title": "East Coker, Somerset", "text": "East Coker is a village in Somerset. It is in the South Somerset District. East Coker is near the town of Yeovil. \nSt Michael's church contains the ashes of the poet T. S. Eliot. One of his poems is called \"East Coker\". William Dampier, explorer and buccaneer was born in the village in 1651. He circumnavigated the world four times and published a book about his experiences. Dampier Island and Dampier Straits off Australia are named after him. Along the approach to the church are 12 almshouses built in 1640 by Archdeacon Helyar, chaplain to Queen Elizabeth l.\nOne of East Coker's famous residents is Trevor Peacock. Trevor Peacock played \"Jim\" in \"The Vicar of Dibley\"."}
{"id": "5604", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5604", "title": "Tatworth", "text": "Tatworth is a village near Chard in the South Somerset District of Somerset, England. It was settled in 1254, but traces of earlier settlers have been found, such as a Roman villa."}
{"id": "5605", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5605", "title": "Chard (Somerset)", "text": "Chard is a town in Somerset. It is in the South Somerset District. It is near the border of the county of Devon.\nChard is the birthplace of aviation. It was in Chard, during 1848, that John Stringfellow (1799 - 1883), first demonstrated that powered flight was possible.\nIn 1685, Chard was one of the towns in which Judge Jefferies held some of the Bloody Assizes after the failure of the Monmouth Rebellion. He stayed in \"The Choughs\", a public house in Chard."}
{"id": "5606", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5606", "title": "Crewkerne", "text": "Crewkerne is a town in Somerset, England where about 6,700 people live. It is in the South Somerset District. \nThe first time it is mentioned in history is 899, when king Alfred the Great left the manor to his son Ethelweard. The name \"Crewkerne\" comes from the Saxon words \"Cruce\" (cross) and \"earne\" (cottage), because of the early church there. There was also a mint where coins were made between 978 and 1035. In 1066, the manor belonged to Edith, mistress of Harold Godwinson. After the Norman Conquest, it belonged directly to William the Conqueror. "}
{"id": "5607", "revid": "4890923", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5607", "title": "Stoford, Somerset", "text": "Stoford is a village in the county of Somerset, England. It is in the South Somerset District."}
{"id": "5608", "revid": "4865890", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5608", "title": "River Tone", "text": "The River Tone is a river in the county of Somerset. It flows through the town of Taunton and joins the River Parrett.\nTaunton takes its name from the River Tone. \"Tone town\" became Taunton."}
{"id": "5610", "revid": "177161", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5610", "title": "River Yeo", "text": "The River Yeo is a river in the county of Somerset in the United Kingdom. It flows through the town of Yeovil and joins the River Parrett.\nYeovil takes its name from the River Yeo. \"Yeo Village\" became \"Yeovil\" over time."}
{"id": "5614", "revid": "7691039", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5614", "title": "River Adur", "text": "The River Adur is a river in the county of Sussex, in England. It starts from South Downs, southern England and ends in the port town of Shoreham-by-Sea."}
{"id": "5617", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5617", "title": "River Aire", "text": "The River Aire is a river in England. It runs through the counties of North Yorkshire, West Yorkshire and the East Riding of Yorkshire, although most of it is in West Yorkshire.\nThe river starts in Malham, and from there flows through (in order) Skipton, Keighley, Shipley, Leeds, Castleford, Knottingley and Airmyn."}
{"id": "5620", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5620", "title": "River Aln", "text": "The River Aln is a river in the county of Northumberland. It has served as a war zone between the English and the Scots."}
{"id": "5623", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5623", "title": "River Alt", "text": "The River Alt is a river in the county of Merseyside in England just north of Liverpool. The river begins near Huyton and flows about 28 km northeast to empty into the Irish Sea at the town of Hightown. Other towns along the river include Kirkby, Maghull and Formby. There are 75\u00a0km of tributary feeding the river. About 250,000 people live in the area around the river. The northern part of the river forms the boundary between the counties of Merseyside and Lancashire."}
{"id": "5626", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5626", "title": "River Yare", "text": "The River Yare is a river in the county of Norfolk, England.\nThe river starts south of Dereham in the county of Norfolk. From there it flows to the east of the world. The river flows along the southern edge of the city of Norwich. The river continues past Norwich into the tidal lake of Breydon Water. Here the Yare is joined by the Rivers Bure and Waveney. It empties into North Sea at Gorleston, Great Yarmouth.Google Chrome\nSmall coastal boats can sail along the river from Norwich to the North Sea. In the past, the river had a large number of boats carrying goods to Norwich. Larger modern boats cannot get across Breydon Water because it is not deep enough. Because of this, a canal was created at Reedham to provides a connection to the River Waveney."}
{"id": "5629", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5629", "title": "River Exe", "text": "The River Exe is a river in the county of Devon in England. It usually flows directly south through the city of Exeter. The island had many mills making paper and textiles, and also created valuable land by draining the marshlands. The wide estuary of the River Exe is a ria (drowned river valley).\nThe name of the city of Exeter means \"castle on the river Exe\"."}
{"id": "5632", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5632", "title": "Ilminster, Somerset", "text": "Ilminster is a town in the county of Somerset. It is in the South Somerset District. \nIlminster is on the River Ile and has a large church. The church is known as the \"Minster\". It is from both of these things that Ilminster takes its name. \"Ile\" and \"Minster\" became \"Ilminster\"."}
{"id": "5633", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5633", "title": "South Cadbury", "text": "South Cadbury is an archaeological site in south Somerset.\nIt was dug in the early 1970s, and it showed many times that people lived there. The first was in the early Neolithic (around 4000-3000 BC?) when the hill seems to have been an important place for groups of early farmers who moved around. Most things were found from when late Bronze Age people lived on the hill (around 1200 BC). In the Iron Age the site changed, with many big walls. There are signs that when the Romans came to Britain, they killed many people here. Ruins of a feasting hall built after the Roman time were also found in the dig. There are also legends connecting this place with King Arthur."}
{"id": "5635", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5635", "title": "Watchet", "text": "Watchet is a harbor town in the county of Somerset in England. It gets its name either from the blue \"wacet\" dye found in the cliffs, or from British \"gwo coed\" or \"waeced\", \"under the wood\". \nHistory.\nIt is first recorded in the 7th century, when Saint Decuman crossed over from South Wales on a raft with a cow to help the people there. Legend says he was killed there by a violent man who cut off his head. There is a spring of water dedicated to him there. \nCoins were minted here for Ethelred II and five other Saxon kings. They have been found as far away as Scandinavia, probably because they were part of the Danegeld - payments made to the Vikings, who attacked Watchet in 918, 977, 988, and destroyed part of it in 997. Harold Godwinson's mother Eleanor fled through this port in 1066.\nWatchet is the only place in England to still have the Court leet system, but only in name, with people chosen for ceremonial jobs like port reeve and ale taster. "}
{"id": "5636", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5636", "title": "Burnham-on-Sea", "text": "Burnham-on-Sea is a small town in the county of Somerset in England on the mouth of the River Parrett at Bridgwater Bay. Burnham was a small fishing village until the late-18th century when it became popular as a seaside resort. This made the village grow larger into a town."}
{"id": "5637", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5637", "title": "Cheddar cheese", "text": "Cheddar is a type of hard cheese made from cow's milk. It originally was produced in the English village of Cheddar, Somerset. Romans may have brought the recipe to Britain from the Cantal region of France. The first record of cheddar cheese dates back to the 12th century. In 1170, King Henry II bought at a farthing per pound. Charles I (1600\u20131649) also bought cheese from Somerset. Cheddar cheese traditionally had to be made within of Wells Cathedral.\nCheddar cheese is different from other cheeses in how it is made. After the curds are heated, they are cut and stacked. The stacks are then turned periodically and re-stacked. This process is called cheddaring. Cheddar cheese is sometimes aged in caves for up to 30 months before it is ready to eat.\nCheddar cheese is the most popular cheese in the United Kingdom. It accounts for 51 percent of the country's \u00a31.9 billion annual cheese market. It is the second most popular cheese in the United States, behind mozzarella, with an average annual consumption of per person. The United States produced 3,233,380,000 lbs in 2010, and the UK 258,000 tonnes in 2008. The name \"cheddar cheese\" is widely used and has no protection within the European Union. Only cheddar produced from local milk within four counties of South West England may use the name \"West Country Farmhouse Cheddar.\"\nCheddar cheese may be used to make cheese on toast."}
{"id": "5638", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5638", "title": "Yatton", "text": "Yatton is a large village with 9,000 people in the county of Somerset in England. Archaeology in the area has found a Roman villa (country-house) belonging to some rich person who lived here in the late 3rd century, judging from the coins. Records show the land was part of the manor of John the Dane before the Norman Conquest, and Giso, bishop of Wells afterward. "}
{"id": "5639", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5639", "title": "Backwell", "text": "Backwell is a village in the county of Avon, in North Somerset. 5,455 people live in Backwell. It is 7 miles from Bristol. Nailsea, Flax Bourton, Yatton, Brockley and Barrow Gurney are nearby.\nThere is a railway station in the village called \"Nailsea and Backwell\". Bristol International Airport is less than three miles away."}
{"id": "5640", "revid": "7526422", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5640", "title": "Nailsea", "text": "Nailsea is a town and civil parish in Somerset, England. In 2011, there were 15,630 people living in Nailsea."}
{"id": "5641", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5641", "title": "Clevedon", "text": "Clevedon is a town in the county of Somerset, in England. The name comes from Old English and means \"divided hill\". Archaeology shows that many people lived here during the Roman occupation. Just before the Norman Conquest in 1066 it was part of a huge manor held by John (Gunni?) the Dane. At the time of the Domesday Book (1086) it belonged to Matthew of Mortaigne and had only a few people living there. The town of today was not built until around 1800 as a seaside resort."}
{"id": "5642", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5642", "title": "Weston-super-Mare", "text": "Weston-super-Mare, sometimes known as just Weston is a sea-side town in Somerset, England. Weston is from the city of Bristol. It also includes the suburbs of Oldmixon, West Wick and Worle. The beach is a popular tourist destination and includes many museums, a pier and an aquarium.\nTransport.\nWeston is linked to the M5 motorway by junction 21 where the daul carriageway A370 goes to the town centre.\nToday, the main railway station, which is on a short loop off the Bristol to Exeter line, is called Westo-super-Mare and is situated close to the town centre and less than ten minutes walk from the sea front."}
{"id": "5643", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5643", "title": "South Somerset", "text": "South Somerset is a district in the county of Somerset. Its council is based in the town of Yeovil. The district was formed on 1 April 1974 and was originally called Yeovil."}
{"id": "5651", "revid": "1123129", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5651", "title": "Scone", "text": "A scone is a kind of bread that is baked on a griddle or sheet. Scones are very small, and are in the same group as the crumpet or muffin. It is made of wheat, barley, or oatmeal and baking powder to make it rise. The scone is shaped closely like the North American biscuit, and its recipe is almost the same with it as well. Sometimes scones may have raisins, currants, cheese, or dates in them. In the United States, however, scones include more sweet kind of fillings like cranberries, chocolate chips, or nuts. They can often be found in coffee shops and in a great variety in the British Isles. It is generally thought that scones are best eaten when they are very hot and freshly baked right from the oven, accompanied with melting warm butter.\nEtymology.\nSome think that scone comes from the Gaelic \"sgonn\", which meant a piece of dough that has been cooked for a couple of minutes, shapeless mass or large mouthful; and the Dutch \"schoonbrot\", which meant \"fine white bread\"; or, for last, the German \"sconbrot\", which meant \"fine or beautiful bread\". The Oxford English Dictionary believes the German and Dutch is more accurate. \nIt is sometimes debated on the correct pronunciation for \"scone\". In Scotland and North England, the word is pronounced as \"skawn\", or \"skahn\", while in Southern England, it is pronounced as \"skoan\" or \"skown\". The latter pronunciation came from the United States and Canada.\nMeanwhile Cambridge Dictionary presents both options as acceptable. \nHistory.\nScones are connected traditionally with England, Scotland, and Ireland, but nobody knows which country invented it. However, the first known mention of a scone that was printed is from the translation of \"The Aenaid\" (1513) written by a Scottish poet named Gavin Douglas.\nScones are related to the ancient Welsh tradition of cooking small round yeast cakes on stones, that later changed to griddles. First-made scones included oats inside them, and were baked over an open fire. However, today's scones are more like American biscuits. They are made with wheat, and baked in the oven.\nThe most popular scones are soda scones, wholemeal scones, rich white scones, treacle scones, potato scones, ballater scones and drop scones. Scones usually take about four to ten minutes to bake."}
{"id": "5659", "revid": "7861555", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5659", "title": "Ankara", "text": "Ankara is the capital city of the country of Turkey. It is in the center of Anatolia. Ankara is the second largest city after Istanbul. The city has a population of 4,319,167 (2005) (Province 5,153,000), and an elevation of 938 meters (3080\u00a0feet). It was formerly known as Eng\u00fcr\u00fc the city is also the capital of Ankara Province\nAnkara is a very modern city. Ankara was made the capital of Turkey in 1923. Ankara is known for its performing arts, home to the State Opera and Ballet, the Presidential Symphony Orchestra and several national theater companies. In Ankara there\u2019s a place called Anitkabir, which is a big hilltop mausoleum that was built to celebrate Kemal Atat\u00fcrk who was the first president.\nHistory.\nAnkara is a city that has a lot of history. Ankara was invaded many times. In 546 BCE, Achaemenid Persians was in control of Ankara (approximated date). Ankara was then invaded by the Romans in 25 BCE. At the time, Ankara was controlled by Augustus. Ankara castle was captured by the Crusaders in 1101. Ankara castle was captured again by the Seljuks in 1227. Ankara was controlled again by the Ottomans in 1403. In October 13, 1923 Ankara became the capital of Turkey."}
{"id": "5675", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5675", "title": "Johannes Gutenberg", "text": "Johannes Gensfleisch zur Laden zum Gutenberg (more commonly known as Johannes Gutenberg) (1390s \u2013 3 February 1468), was a German metal-worker and inventor. He is famous for his work in printing in the 1450s, and is specifically known for inventing typography.\nGutenberg was born in Mainz, Germany, as the son of a merchant, Friele Gensfleisch zur Laden. Gutenberg's father took the surname \"zum Gutenberg\" after the name of the place they now lived.\nGutenberg invented a sort of metal alloy for printing; inks; a way to fix type (metal letters) very accurately; and a new sort of printing press. He took the idea for his printing press from the presses wine-makers used. Many people say Gutenberg invented printing with moveable type, but it was already invented in China before that: see printing.\nBefore movable type, people used block printing, where the printer prints a whole page from one piece of metal or wood. With movable type, the printer makes a letter (A, B, C ...) from a piece of metal or wood, and can use it again and again in different words. Together, all Gutenberg's inventions made printing fast. In Renaissance Europe, the improved information technology made an information explosion \u2013 in a short time, people printed many new books about many topics.\nThe high number of new books was partly because of the popular Bible Gutenberg printed \u2013 the Gutenberg Bible. This was the first Bible people made in large numbers; Gutenberg started on 23 February 1455. Gutenberg was not a clever businessman, and did not get much money from his system. He had legal problems, and lost his machines to his partner, Johann Fust. The Archbishop at the time sympathized with Gutenberg because of his contributions to society, so told him that he would receive a pension each year with clothes, wine, and grain. Gutenberg died in Mainz, Germany, in 1468.\nIn his lifetime Gutenberg was not successful, but his invention was very important. In a short time, news and books were traveling around Europe very fast. Scientists could communicate better, which helped bring the scientific revolution and new technology. More Europeans, not just priests, scribes and scholars, learned to read.\nToday, there are still 60 Gutenberg Bibles. They are probably the oldest books that printers made with moveable type.\nThe \"Gutenberg Galaxy\" and Project Gutenberg use Gutenberg's name. The city of Guttenberg, Iowa in the United States is named after him."}
{"id": "5678", "revid": "22069", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5678", "title": "BE 1,500", "text": ""}
{"id": "5680", "revid": "1154767", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5680", "title": "Elizabeth I", "text": "Elizabeth I (7 September 1533 \u2013 24 March 1603) was the Queen of England and Ireland. She was queen from 17 November 1558 until she died in March 1603. She was also called Good Queen Bess or the Virgin Queen or Gloriana.\nShe was the daughter of King Henry VIII of England and Anne Boleyn, his second wife, and was the last of the Tudor dynasty of monarchs. When Boleyn was disgraced at court and executed, Elizabeth's life became a troubled one, including being locked up in the Tower of London, an old prison, as punishment for not being a male heir.\nDespite that, Elizabeth reigned with intelligence and hard work. Her reign was distinguished with great achievements in the arts, trade, and exploration. She ably defended her country through the days of the Spanish Armada. She never married, but claimed that she was married to England. She also had a few other favourites, including the Earl of Leicester. At her death in 1603, King James VI of Scotland was named her successor.\nEarly life.\nElizabeth was born in 1533 at Greenwich, England. She was the daughter of King Henry VIII of England and his second wife, Anne Boleyn. She had an older half-sister Mary, and, later, a younger half-brother Edward. \nElizabeth was given a good education. She could speak and read six languages: her native English, as well as French, Italian, Spanish, Greek, and Latin.\nWhen she was thirteen and a half years old, on 28 January 1547, King Henry died. Elizabeth's half-brother, Edward, became King Edward VI of England. He died age 15. Mary succeeded him in 1553, and after Queen Mary's death in 1558, Elizabeth became Queen.\nAchievements as Queen.\nMary I had brought back the Roman Catholic religion in England. Elizabeth returned the nation to the Church of England of her father. She did however retain some of the Catholic traditions. She wanted her subjects to make it look like they were being Protestant even if they were not.\nThe years of Elizabeth's reign had many artistic achievements. William Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, Edmund Spenser, and other writers created enduring drama and poetry. Composers Thomas Tallis and William Byrd worked at Elizabeth's court.\nDuring her reign, many men sought adventure abroad. Elizabeth rented a slave ship to John Hawkins and gave him weapons and equipment to keep slave trading. Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh, Humphrey Gilbert, and other \"sea dogs\" looted Spanish ships. They also sailed to the Americas. In 1580, Drake became the first Englishman to sail around the world. The expeditions of these men prepared England for an age of discovery and international trade and owning other parts of the world. In 1600, Elizabeth herself established a trading company known as the East India Company that became an important tool of the British Empire.\nHer Suitors.\nElizabeth had many suitors and people who she physically enjoyed in the privy council, one of the suitors and childhood friend Elizabeth liked the most was Robert Dudley. Fortunately, in great times of need she would turn to him since it is well rumoured there was mutual attraction between the two. In the Queen's Court they would find it amusing during meetings of great importance to question William Cecil's motives concerning Mary Queen of Scots' imprisonment. It was well known during her say at Sheffield manor lodge they were fond of torture device ideas, it was thought they had joked about wanting to \" scrap \" because Mary had claimed Elizabeth is in fact \" all talk \" , which then she expresses \" be my sister! \" to which Elizabeth finds herself injecting a hot poker up the other end of the quite vigorous and feisty Mary. Mary Queen of Scots who is Elizabeth\u2019s cousin did infact have a hunchback which was given to her by lord darnely just before she plotted his death and blew up his house.\nSpanish Armada.\nEngland and Spain had long quarrelled. Elizabeth encouraged Protestants in the Spanish-held Netherlands to rebel against Spain. She also encouraged her \"sea dogs\" to raid Spanish ships. In 1588, King Philip II of Spain sent an armada (a large fleet of ships) to invade England. \nElizabeth met her troops at Tilbury telling them: \"I know I have the body of a weak, feeble woman; but I have the heart and stomach of a king \u2013 and of a King of England too\". \nThe Spanish Armada was met by England's smaller ships on 29 July 1588. They defeated the Armada. The Armada was driven by southwest winds to the north. The English fleet harried it up the east coast of England. The Armada returned to Spain round the north of Scotland and south around Ireland. It was hit by bad weather near Scotland and Ireland, and some ships were wrecked on those coasts. More than a third of the ships did not return to Spain.\nQueen's noblemen.\nElizabeth never married, and she had no children. However, she was fond of several noblemen in her court. Prominent among these noblemen was Robert Dudley, the 1st Earl of Leicester. Later, she turned to Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex. He wanted to overthrow the government of the Queen. He was defeated and executed.\nElizabeth's death.\nElizabeth died at Richmond Palace on 24 March 1603. The Protestant King of Scotland James VI became King of England. He was the son of her cousin Mary, Queen of Scots. \nElizabeth I was the last Tudor monarch, and reigned for 44 years. Her accession date was a national holiday for two hundred years."}
{"id": "5681", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5681", "title": "Cate Blanchett", "text": "Catherine Elise Blanchett (; born 14 May 1969) is an Australian actress, producer, and theatre director. She was born in Ivanhoe, Victoria, Australia. \nIn 1998 she won an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress for playing Elizabeth I in \"Elizabeth\". In 2005 she won Best Supporting Actress for playing Katharine Hepburn in Martin Scorsese's \"The Aviator\". \nRegarded as one of the greatest actresses of her generation, she is noted for her versatile roles in blockbusters, independent films, and in her stage work in various theatre productions. She has received numerous accolades, including two Academy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, and three British Academy Film Awards."}
{"id": "5687", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5687", "title": "Kylie Minogue", "text": "Kylie Ann Minogue, (; born 28 May 1968) is an Australian singer, songwriter and actress, sometimes known simply as Kylie. She became popular in the late 1980s, because of her role in the Australian television soap opera \"Neighbours\", before becoming a dance-pop singer.\nEarly life.\nMinogue was born in Melbourne to a Welsh immigrant mother and Irish-Australian father. Her sister Dannii Minogue is also a singer and actress, and her brother Brendan works as a cameraman.\nCareer.\nShe was signed to a contract by British songwriters and producers Stock, Aitken &amp; Waterman, she got hit records throughout the world. Her popularity began to decline by the early 1990s and she left Stock, Aitken &amp; Waterman in 1992. For years she tried to become an independent performer and songwriter. Her projects were widely talked about, but her albums resulted in the lowest sales of her career.\nIn 2000, Minogue became popular again as a dance-pop singer and became well known for her sexual music videos and elaborate concerts. She has one of the longest and most successful careers in pop music, and she has become one of the most recognisable celebrities and sex symbols. In Australia, she holds the record for the highest concert ticket sales for a woman, and has had nine singles at number one on the ARIA Singles Chart.\nPersonal life.\nBreast cancer.\nOn 17 May 2005, Minogue was diagnosed with breast cancer. She was on tour at the time, and the rest of it had to be cancelled. Minogue had surgery for it on 21 May 2005 at a hospital in Malvern, Victoria, and started chemotherapy soon afterwards. She finished her chemotherapy treatment in January 2006 but still needed six more weeks of radiotherapy to stop any new cancerous tumours from growing.\nRelationships.\nMinogue was in a relationship with Andres Velencoso from 2008 until 2013. \nMinogue began a relationship with Joshua Sasse in 2015. The couple became engaged in February 2016. They said in February 2017 that they had split up."}
{"id": "5688", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5688", "title": "Natalie Imbruglia", "text": "Natalie Jane Imbruglia (born 4 February 1975) is an Australian actress and singer-songwriter. \nImbruglia was born in Sydney, New South Wales to an Anglo-Australian mother and Italian-Australian father.\nImbruglia began acting in Australian television commercials and was in spots for Coca-Cola and the popular Australian snack Twisties. By age 16, she left high school to start a career in acting. She soon had the chance to play a regular role on the Australian soap opera \"Neighbours\". She left the show to move to London in 1994. \nShe received an MTV Award for Best New Artist in 1998. She had 3 Grammy Award nominations in 1999. That same year, she also won two Brit Awards for Best International Newcomer and Best International Female. She has sold over 9\u00a0million albums worldwide."}
{"id": "5689", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5689", "title": "Nicole Kidman", "text": "Nicole Mary Kidman, AC (born 20 June 1967) is an Australian-American actress, singer and film producer. She began acting in movies in 1983. She starred in various Australian movies and television shows. Her first major role was in \"Dead Calm\" in 1989.\nHer performance in the musical \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001) earned her a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress. She later won the award in this category for playing Virginia Woolf in \"The Hours\" (2002).\nKidman appeared as Atlanna, Aquaman's mother, in the 2018 DC Comics-Warner Bros. movie \"Aquaman\" (2018).\nEarly life.\nNicole Kidman was born in Honolulu, Hawaii while her Australian parents were temporarily in the United States on educational visas. Kidman can therefore claim citizenship in Australia and the United States. Her father, Antony David Kidman (1938-2014) was a biochemist, clinical psychologist, and author. Her mother, Janelle Ann (n\u00e9e Glenny), is a nursing instructor who edits her husband's books and was a member of the Women's Electoral Lobby. Kidman is of Scottish and Irish ancestry. At the time of Kidman's birth, her father was a graduate student at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. He soon became a visiting fellow at the National Institute of Mental Health of the United States. Opposed to the war in Vietnam, which was causing social unrest in both Australia and the United States, Kidman's parents participated in anti-war protests while they were living in Washington, D.C. The family returned to Australia when Kidman was four and her parents now live on Sydney's North Shore. Kidman has a younger sister, Antonia Kidman, a journalist and TV presenter.\nCareer.\nKidman's first movie was in 1983. It was called \"BMX Bandits\". Her first famous movie was \"Dead Calm\" in 1989.\nHer first major movie was called \"Days of Thunder\", which also starred Tom Cruise. They fell in love during the filming of that movie and married. Kidman was then in more movies like \"Flirting\", \"Billy Bathgate\", \"Far and Away\", \"Malice\", \"My Life\" and \"To Die For\". All of these movies were successes.\nShe was then in movies like \"Batman Forever\" and \"Practical Magic\". In 1999 she starred in a movie with Cruise called \"Eyes Wide Shut\". They played a married couple in the movie. It was the last movie directed by director Stanley Kubrick. They separated and divorced after making \"Eyes Wide Shut\".\nSince Kidman and Cruise divorced, she has been in movies including: \"Moulin Rouge!\", \"The Others\", \"Cold Mountain\", \"The Stepford Wives\" and \"Bewitched\".\nPersonal life.\nShe was married to Tom Cruise until 2001. She is now married to Keith Urban."}
{"id": "5690", "revid": "7824863", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5690", "title": "Hugh Jackman", "text": "Hugh Michael Jackman (born 12 October 1968) is an Australian actor, singer and producer. He plays on different roles and various genres of movies like romance, superhero, musical, drama, action and comedy.\nEarly and personal life.\nJackman was born on 12 October 1968 in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia to English parents. He is best known for his long-running role as Wolverine in the \"X-Men\" movie series. His performances in \"The Fountain\", \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" and \"Prisoners\" garnered strong critical acclaim.\nHis work in \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" earned him an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor and a Golden Globe Award in 2013. In theater, he won a Tony Award for his role in \"The Boy from Oz\".\nA four-time host of the Tony Awards, winning an Emmy Award for one of these appearances, Jackman also hosted the 81st Academy Awards on 22 February 2009.\nJackman married Deborra-Lee Furness in 1996 in Melbourne. The couple adopted a son and daughter. Jackman has been described as one of the world's most attractive man, by various media outlets and his perceived sex appeal has been picked up by many sources, including \"Empire\", who named him one of the sexiest stars in movie history and \"People\", who named him one of the World's Most Beautiful People. In 2008 Jackman won \"People\"'s Sexiest Man Alive.\nJackman appeared on \"Forbes\"'s annual Celebrity 100 list of the 100 most powerful celebrities and In 2013, he topped \"Forbes\"'s Most Powerful Actors list.\nJackman plays multiple sports, plays the guitar, piano and violin and does dancing. He is also a philanthropist.\nIn November 2013, Jackman announced he had skin cancer removed from his nose. He had a second cancer removed from his nose in May 2014, and said that the cancer will always return."}
{"id": "5691", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5691", "title": "Mel Gibson", "text": "Mel Colm-Cille Gerard Gibson (born January 3, 1956) is an American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter. He is mostly known for his roles in action movies. Some of his most famous roles are in \"Mad Max\" (1979), \"Gallipoli\" (1981), \"The Bounty\" (1984), \"Lethal Weapon\" (1987), and \"Braveheart\" (1995). He directed \"The Passion of the Christ\" in 2004. He loosely based it on the visions of St. Catherine Emmerich.\nGibson was born in Peekskill, New York, United States. His father, Hutton Gibson, was a veteran soldier during World War II and was also a famous writer. His family moved to Australia in 1968, when he was 12. He studied acting at the National Institute of Dramatic Art in Sydney. He also has Irish citizenship."}
{"id": "5692", "revid": "1144156", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5692", "title": "Natalie Portman", "text": "Natalie Portman (born Neta-Lee Hershlag; ; June 9, 1981) is an Israeli-American actress and filmmaker. She was born in Jerusalem, Israel. Portman is an only child. She lived in Washington, D.C. and Connecticut before coming to Long Island, New York with her parents. In 1999, she graduated from Syosset High School. Portman attended Harvard University, studying Psychology. In 2010, She won the Academy, BAFTA and Golden Globe Awards for \"Best Actress\" for her acting in the movie \"Black Swan\".\nShe is most famous for starring in Star Wars Episodes I, II and III as Padme in the early 21st century. She has also appeared on Saturday Night Live."}
{"id": "5695", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5695", "title": "Alyson Hannigan", "text": "Alyson Lee Hannigan is an American actress. She was born March 24, 1974 in Washington, D.C. She moved to Atlanta, Georgia when she was 2 years old to live with her mother. She started to act in commercials for McDonalds, Six Flags amusement parks and Oreo cookies when she was small. When she was 11, she went to Los Angeles with her mother to go to school and become famous. She started getting noticed with her roles in \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" as Willow Rosenberg and in the \"American Pie\" movies as Michelle Flaherty. She is currently on the television series \"How I Met Your Mother\"."}
{"id": "5696", "revid": "54777", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5696", "title": "Jessica Alba", "text": "Jessica Marie Alba (born April 28, 1981) is a businesswoman, American television and movie actress, and model. She started her business, The Honest Company, in 2011. Alba made her first movie, \"Camp Nowhere\", at age 13 and in the television drama series \"Dark Angel\" (2000\u20132002). Alba later acted in several movies, such as \"Honey\" (2003), \"Sin City\" (2005) and \"Good Luck Chuck\" (2007). Alba has won several awards for her acting. These awards include the \"Choice Actress\" award at the Teen Choice Award and a Saturn Award. Both of these awards were for her acting in the series \"Dark Angel\". \nShe has been listed in the \"Hot 100\" section of \"Maxim\" magazine every year from 2003 to 2007, and she was voted \"Sexiest Woman in the World\" by \"FHM\" in 2007. In March 2007, a picture of her was used on the cover of \"Playboy\". \"Playboy\" did not ask her if they could use the picture or tell her they were going to use it. This caused a lawsuit that was later dropped.\nEarly life.\nAlba was born in Pomona, California. Her mother, Catherine, is of Danish, Irish, Scottish, Welsh, English, German and French Canadian ancestry and her father, Mark, is Mexican American, and is of Indigenous Mexican, Sephardic Jewish, Spanish and Mayan ancestry. She has a younger brother named Joshua. Alba's father was in the Air Force and his career caused them to live in many different places. They lived in Biloxi, Mississippi and Del Rio, Texas before returning to California at age 9. When she was young, Alba was ill many times. She had a collapsed lung twice, had pneumonia four or five times each year and had problems with her appendix and tonsils. She was in hospitals for much of her childhood. This meant Alba did not spend much time with other children. Alba has also said that she had obsessive-compulsive disorder when she was a child. The disorder affected her much less when her family moved to California. She graduated from high school when she was 16 years old. After high school, she went to the Atlantic Theater Company.\nCareer.\nAlba wanted to act since she was five. She took her first acting class at age twelve. An acting agent signed her nine months later. Her first movie work was a small role in the 1994 movie \"Camp Nowhere\". At first, she was only hired for two weeks but ended up working for two months because another actress dropped out.\nAlba starred in two national television commercials when she was a child. One of these was for Nintendo and the other was for J.C. Penney. She played Jessica in three episodes of the Nickelodeon comedy series \"The Secret World of Alex Mack\". Alba was then Maya in the television series \"Flipper\". Her mother was a lifeguard and had taught Jessica to swim before she could walk. She is a certified scuba diver.\nIn 1998, she acted in \"Brooklyn South\", in two episodes of \"Beverly Hills, 90210\" and in an episode of \"The Love Boat: The Next Wave\". After Alba graduated from high school, she studied acting with William H. Macy and his wife, Felicity Huffman, at the Atlantic Theater Company.\nShe became more famous in Hollywood in 1999 after acting in the Drew Barrymore romantic comedy \"Never Been Kissed\", and as the main female character in the 1999 comedy-horror movie \"Idle Hands\". She was chosen from a group of 1,200 actresses for the role of the genetically-engineered soldier, on the FOX sci-fi television series \"Dark Angel\". The series ran for two seasons from 2000 until 2002. Alba was nominated for a Golden Globe for her work on that series. When she trained to be in \"Dark Angel\", Alba had to exercise very much and she starved herself. She said \"A lot of girls have eating disorders and I did too. I got obsessed with it.\" She also had obsessive compulsive disorder and panic attacks. She said she has been cooking for herself since the age of twelve so she would not become as fat as her family members.\nSome of Alba's most famous movie roles are a dancer in \"Sin City\" and as Marvel Comics character Sue Storm, the Invisible Woman in the \"Fantastic Four\". She also acted in \"Into the Blue\" in 2005 and \"Good Luck Chuck\" a few years later. In 2008, Alba played her first horror-movie role in \"The Eye\", a remake of the Hong Kong original. In February, she hosted an Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences's ceremony. Later in the year, she starred in \"The Love Guru\".\nIn 2010, Alba appeared in five movies including \"Little Fockers\" and \"The Killer Inside Me\". The following year she appeared in \"Spy Kids 4\", a sequel to \"Spy Kids\".\nPublic image.\nIn 2007, \"Maxim Magazine\" listed Alba as number 2 in their \"Top 100\", after Lindsay Lohan. \"GQ\" had her picture on their June covers. In May, after eight million votes, \"FHM\" (UK and US editions) named Alba the winner as \"2007\u2019s Sexiest Woman in the World\". She received the Teen Choice Award for \"Choice Actress\" and Saturn Award for Best Actress (TV) for her role in \"Dark Angel\", along with a Golden Globe nomination. In 2006, she received an MTV Movie Award for \"Sexiest Performance\" for \"Sin City\".\nSome people have said Alba's acting was bad. She was nominated for a 2007 Razzie Award for Worst Actress for her work in \"Awake\", \"Good Luck Chuck\", and \"\".\nOn the cover of the March 2006 issue, \"Playboy\" magazine named Alba among its 25 Sexiest Celebrities and the \"Sex Star of the Year\". She took \"Playboy\" to court for using a picture of her without her permission. However, she later dropped the lawsuit when she got a personal apology from \"Playboy\" owner Hugh Hefner. He agreed to make donations to two charities that Alba supports.\nPersonal life.\nAlba was raised in the Roman Catholic religion. When she was a teenager she became a born-again Christian. However, she left the church after four years because she believed that she was being judged by the way she looked. She has said that she still believes in God even though she is not a member of the church. Alba has not performed naked. She was given the option to appear nude in \"Sin City\" by the movie's directors, Frank Miller and Robert Rodriguez. She said no to the offer saying, \"I don't do nudity. I just don't. Maybe that makes me a bad actress. Maybe I won't get hired in some things. But I have too much anxiety\".\nWhile filming \"Dark Angel\", Alba began a romance with another member of the cast, Michael Weatherly. This caused controversy because he was 12 years older than she was. He asked her to marry him on her twentieth birthday but she said no. They eventually broke up after a four-year relationship. When talking about children, she said, \"I'm really girly when it comes to kids. I've been surrounded by children my whole life because I'm the oldest of 15 cousins - I've been changing (nappies) since I was six... I want to have a couple, for sure.\". Alba is a Democrat and attended the 2012 Democratic National Convention in support of President Obama's re-election.\nAlba married Cash Warren on May 19, 2008 in Los Angeles, California. She met him while making \"Fantastic Four\" in 2004. On June 7, 2008, Alba gave birth to a baby girl called Honor Marie Warren. She also does some charity work, including clothes charity \"Clothes Off Our Back\" and women's charity \"Step Up Women's Network\". On August 13, 2011, she gave birth to her second daughter, Haven Garner Warren."}
{"id": "5697", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5697", "title": "Brad Pitt", "text": "William Bradley \"Brad\" Pitt (born December 18, 1963) is an Academy Award-winning American actor and movie producer. \nEarly life.\nWilliam Bradley Pitt was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma, to Jane Etta (n\u00e9e Hillhouse), a school counsellor, and William Alvin Pitt, who ran a trucking company. The family soon moved to Springfield, Missouri, where he lived together with his younger siblings, Doug (born 1966) and Julie Neal (born 1969). He was born into a conservative household. He was raised as Southern Baptist. Pitt has described Springfield as \"Mark Twain country, Jesse James country\", having grown up with \"a lot of hills, a lot of lakes\".\nCareer.\nPitt's television debut came in May 1987 with a two-episode role on the NBC soap opera \"Another World\". In 1995 Pitt won two MTV Movie Awards for his role in \"Interview with the Vampire\". He played Tyler Durden in \"Fight Club\". Pitt produced the 2013 movie \"12 Years a Slave\". He also played a small role in the movie. \nHe starred in two Quentin Tarantino movies: \"Inglourious Basterds\" and \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\".\nIn 2020, he won an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for his role in \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\"."}
{"id": "5698", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5698", "title": "Jennifer Aniston", "text": "Jennifer Joanna Aniston (born March 11, 1969) is an American actor, movie producer, and television producer. She is best known for her starring role on the television program \"Friends\". For this she won an Emmy Award, and a Golden Globe Award. Since then she has been in many different movies.\nEarly life.\nJennifer Aniston was born on February 11, 1969, in Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles, California. She is the daughter of John Aniston and Nancy Dow. Her father is Greek and a native of Crete, while her mother was born in New York City. Dow died of a stroke in May 2016. One of her maternal great-grandfathers was an Italian immigrant, and her mother's other ancestry is Scottish, Irish, and a small amount of Greek. Aniston has two half-brothers, John Melick, her maternal older half-brother, and Alex Aniston, her younger paternal half-brother. Aniston's godfather was actor Telly Savalas, one of her father's best friends.\nPersonal life.\nShe was married to Brad Pitt from 2000 until they divorced in 2005. They acted together in the episode \"The One with the Rumor\" on \"Friends\". She began a relationship with Justin Theroux in 2011. The couple married in 2015 in Bel Air, Los Angeles.\nOn February 15, 2018, Aniston and Theroux announced that they were separating after two years of marriage and seven years as a couple."}
{"id": "5699", "revid": "470168", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5699", "title": "Jennifer Love Hewitt", "text": "Jennifer Love Hewitt (born February 21, 1979) is an American actress and singer. She is most known for playing \"Sarah Reeves\" in the Fox television series \"Party of Five\" from (1995-1999), and as \"Julie James\" in the \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" movies. She also played \"Melinda Gordon\" on the CBS television series \"Ghost Whisperer\".\nBiography.\nEarly life and career.\nHewitt was born in Waco, Texas. Her father is Herbert Daniel Hewitt. Her mother was Patricia Mae (n\u00e9e Shipp, died 2012). She moved to Garland, Texas in 1987. Hewitt grew up in Killeen, Texas. After the divorce of her parents, Hewitt and her only sibling, Todd Hewitt, grew up with her mother.\nAs a young girl, Hewitt liked music. At the age of three, she sang \"The Greatest Love of All\" at a livestock show. By the time she was five, Hewitt did tap dancing and ballet. At the age of ten she moved to Los Angeles, California, with her mother for a career in both acting and singing.\nAfter moving to Los Angeles, Hewitt was in more than twenty television commercials. She was a child actor on the Disney Channel variety show \"Kids Incorporated\" (1989\u20131991). Hewitt became a young star after getting the role of 'Sarah Reeves' on the Fox Television show \"Party of Five\" (1995\u20131999). She joined the cast during its second season.\nMovie and music career.\nHewitt's first movie role was in the independent movie \"Munchie\" (1992). Hewitt became very well known after a lead role in the horror movie \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\" (1997). She also played in the sequel \"I Still Know What You Did Last Summer\" (1998). Other movie roles included the high school comedy \"Can't Hardly Wait\" (1998) and the romantic comedy \"Heartbreakers\" (2001). In 2002, she worked with Jackie Chan in the action comedy \"The Tuxedo\".\nShe has released four albums with some success, mostly in Europe and Japan. Her first album was released in Japan, where she is widely known.\nPersonal life.\nHewitt married actor Brian Hallisay in 2013. The couple's daughter named Autumn James Hallisay, born on November 26, 2013. Their son named Atticus James Hallisay, born on June 24, 2015."}
{"id": "5700", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5700", "title": "Katie Holmes", "text": "Katherine Noelle \"Katie\" Holmes (born December 18, 1978) is an American actress. She was born in Toledo, Ohio. She was \"Joey\" on the WB network TV show Dawson's Creek. Her mother's name is Katherine Ann Holmes\nPersonal life.\nHolmes dated her \"Dawson's Creek\" co-star Joshua Jackson early in the show's run. Holmes met actor Chris Klein in 2000. Klein and Holmes were engaged in late 2003. In early 2005 she and Klein ended their relationship.\nWeeks after her relationship with Klein ended, Holmes began dating actor Tom Cruise. She and Cruise married on November 18, 2006. On April 18, 2006 their daughter named Suri was born.\nIn June 2012, Holmes filed for divorce. This was the first divorce for Holmes and the third for Cruise.\nLegal issues.\nIn early March 2011, Holmes filed a $50 million libel lawsuit against the \"Star\". They had a cover story which made it seem that she took drugs. The suit was settled on April 27, 2011. The \"Star\" wrote a public apology in the May 6, 2011 issue. They also made a \"substantial\" donation to Katie's charity Dizzy Feet Foundation.\nAwards.\nIn June 2011 Katie Holmes received the Women in Film Max Mara Face of the Future Award."}
{"id": "5701", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5701", "title": "Sigourney Weaver", "text": "Sigourney Weaver (born as \"Susan Alexandra Weaver\" on October 8, 1949, in New York City) is an American actress.\nWeaver played the role of Lieutenant Ellen Ripley in the movie series \"Alien\", in the four movies \"Alien\", \"Aliens\", \"Alien\u00b3\", and \"\". She is also well known for playing Dana Barrett in the movies \"Ghostbusters\" and \"Ghostbusters II\" or for the role Dian Fossey in the movie \"Gorillas in the Mist\".\nShe was the first person to win two Golden Globe acting awards in the same year."}
{"id": "5702", "revid": "196251", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5702", "title": "Audrey Hepburn", "text": "Audrey Hepburn (4 May 1929 \u2013 20 January 1993) was a Belgian-born British actress admired for her charm and elegance.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Brussels, Belgium, to an English father and a Dutch mother who were divorced in 1935. She grew up in Arnhem municipality in the Netherlands during the war, with her mother and two maternal half-brothers. When World War II ended, she and her mother moved to England. There, she studied ballet, and began working as a model and appearing in bit parts in the theatre and in movies. \nCareer.\nHepburn got her first major break in 1951, when she was chosen by French writer Colette to play the lead role in the English version of her play \"Gigi\" on Broadway. \nThis led to her being cast in the lead female part in the movie \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), opposite Gregory Peck. The movie made her an instant international star. Her performance won her the Academy Award, the Golden Globe Award and the BAFTA for best actress. She then appeared in a string of successful romantic comedies, such as \"Sabrina\" (1954), \"Love in the Afternoon\" (1957), \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (1961), \"Charade\" (1963), \"How to Steal a Million\" (1967), etc. She also appeared in two musicals; \"Funny Face\" (1957) and \"My Fair Lady\" (1964) and tackled more dramatic roles in movies such as \"War and Peace\" (1956), \"The Nun's Story\" (1959), \"The Children's Hour\" (1961), \"Two for the Road\" (1967) and the thriller \"Wait Until Dark\" (1967). \nAfter an eight years absence from the screen to take care of her family, she returned with \"Robin and Marian\" (1976), opposite Sean Connery. She also appeared in \"Bloodline\" (1979) and \"They All Laughed\" (1981) but retired for good shortly after.\nIn later life, she worked as a Goodwill Ambassasor for UNICEF and hosted a television series \"The Gardens of the World with Audrey Hepburn\". \nShe was married twice; first to actor/director Mel Ferrer in 1954, with whom she had a son Sean (b. 1960), and second to Italian psychiatrist Doctor Andrea Dotti in 1969, with whom she had a second son Luca (b. 1970). Both marriages ended in divorce.\nDeath and legacy.\nHepburn died of appendix cancer in January 1993. Her elder son, Sean Ferrer, later wrote a book about his mother, called \"Audrey Hepburn: an elegant spirit\". The asteroid 4238 Audrey is named after her."}
{"id": "5704", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5704", "title": "Katharine Hepburn", "text": "Katharine Houghton Hepburn (May 12, 1907\u00a0\u2013 June 29, 2003) was an American actress. Her career lasted 66 years. She is thought of as one of the top screen actresses in movie history. She was nominated for 12 Academy Awards, winning four.\nHepburn was born in Hartford, Connecticut and went to Bryn Mawr College. She got her degree in 1928 and started on Broadway that same year.\nIn 1932 she got a role in the George Cukor movie \"A Bill of Divorcement\", with John Barrymore. She was very successful in the early 1930s, but then she became unpopular. She became popular again with the movie \"The Philadelphia Story\". In 1942 she starred in \"Woman of the Year\" with Spencer Tracy. They made eight more movies together, including \"Adam's Rib\" and \"Guess Who's Coming to Dinner\". They also had an off-screen romance that lasted until Tracy's death in 1967, but they never married because Tracy did not want to divorce his wife. Before this, Hepburn was married to Ludlow Ogden Smith from 1928-1934, and also had relationships with Leland Hayward and Howard Hughes.\nHer autobiography, \"Me: Stories of My Life\", came out in 1991. She died on June 29, 2003 at 2:50 p.m., at Fenwick, the Hepburn family home, in Old Saybrook, Connecticut. She was 96."}
{"id": "5709", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5709", "title": "Basic English picture wordlist", "text": ""}
{"id": "5711", "revid": "461864", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5711", "title": "Charles Kay Ogden", "text": "Charles Kay Ogden (1 June 1889 \u2013 21 March 1957) was an English linguist, philosopher, psycholinguist and writer. He is a well-known book writer about the controlled language called Basic English. He is known for his work with I. A. Richards on \"The Meaning of Meaning\" (1923). He also translated \"Tractatus\", a book by Ludwig Wittgenstein, into English."}
{"id": "5713", "revid": "766335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5713", "title": "God Save the Queen", "text": "\"God Save the Queen\" has been the national anthem of the United Kingdom since 1745. Its also the royal anthem of the Commonwealth realms, played alongside their official national anthems. Its composer remains unknown to this date.\nWhen the ruling monarch is a king instead of a queen, the title of the anthem then becomes \"God Save the King\".\nThe tune for \"God Save the Queen\" was used in many countries as a national anthem. Apart from the German state, many of which were linked to Great Britain by marriage, Liechtenstein and Switzerland used the tune. Switzerland changed to a different tune in the 1960s. Liechtenstein still uses the tune.\nThe tune is both American and British. In the 1930s the United States chose an official anthem. \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" was chosen instead of the equally popular \"My Country 'tis of Thee\" which used the \"God Save the Queen\" tune."}
{"id": "5714", "revid": "7844621", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5714", "title": "Lion", "text": "The lion (\"Panthera leo\") is a large mammal of the \"Felidae\" (cat) family. Some large males weigh over . Today, wild lions live in sub-Saharan Africa and in Asia. Lions are adapted for life in grasslands and mixed areas with trees and grass. The relatively small females are fast runners over short distances, and coordinate their hunting of herd animals.\nLions have disappeared from North Africa and southwest Asia in historic times. Until the late Pleistocene, about 10,000\u00a0years ago, the lion was the most widespread large land mammal after humans. They were found in most of Africa, across Eurasia from western Europe to India, and in the Americas from the Yukon to Peru. The lion is now a vulnerable species. There was a decline in its African range of 30\u201350% over two decades in the second half of the 20th century. Habitat loss and conflicts with humans are the greatest causes of concern.\nLions are often called the \"king of the beasts\". They are used as symbols representing courage. They appear in heraldry more often than any other animal. They are an icon of courage and royalty.\nLions live for 10 to 14 years when they are in the wild. When they are captured, they can live longer than 20 years. In the wild, males do not usually live longer than 10 years. This is because wounds from fighting with other males make their lives shorter. They usually live in savanna and grassland. These areas do have bushes and trees, but lions are mainly adapted to catch prey on grasslands. Compared to other cats, lions are social. A group of lions is called a pride. In a pride of lions, there are related females, their young, and one or two adult males. Groups of female lions often hunt together.\nLions are carnivores and scavengers. Lions are apex predators. Lions eat antelope, buffalo, zebras, warthogs, wildebeest, birds, hares, turtles and fish. Lions scavenge animals either dead from natural causes (disease) or killed by other predators. They keep a constant lookout for circling vultures, because this means there is a dead or injured animal close by.\nAdaptations.\nThey have an archetypal roar which is used to communicate with other group members and warn different intruders of territorial boundaries.\nThey have long, retractable claws which help the lion to grab and hold prey. They also have a rough tongue that helps them peel the skin of prey animals away from flesh and flesh away from bone. Across their belly, they have loose skin which allows the species to be kicked by prey with little chance of an injury. the lion\u00a0is a\u00a0very dangerous\u00a0animal but if you go to a zoo the lion are domestic they are not dangerous because the are with humans all the day. \nDescription.\nThere are about 30,000 lions left in the wild in Africa. Only 350 lions (of the Asiatic lion subspecies) are left in Asia. They live in the Gir Forest in the state of Gujarat, India.\nLions hunt many animals, such as gnus and antelopes. Male lions usually weigh between . Large lions have reached . Females (lionesses) are usually . Mature male lions are the only cats with a mane. The lion has a long body, short legs, large claws, big head, and a yellowish-brown coat.\nBehavior.\nLions live in groups that are called prides. 10 to 40 lions may live in a pride. Each pride has a home area that is called its territory. Lions do not allow other carnivores (meat-eating animals) to hunt in their territory. A territory can be as large as . \nThe lions' roar is distinct to each individual. It is used for territorial marking and warning off other lions in separate prides (or lone individuals). This however, is usually carried out by competing males. Other male lions will challenge the alpha of the pride to a fight in order to take their spot of dominance if they win. Lions actually have prides in order to strengthen their species throughout the generations (Boothalingam 2018).\nLions are not as built for extreme speed as cheetahs are, but hunt in packs. This is unusual in cats. The females usually do the hunting for the pride. However the males can sometimes help if needed, to take down large animals. After lions have brought down a prey, they suffocate it by biting the front of its face to prevent it breathing. Lions prey are zebra and deer. Lions also have long retractable claws which act like grappling hooks, to keep hold of the prey.\nEven though a lion is good at killing prey for food, they are not among the most dangerous animals for humans.\nBreeding.\nA lioness is ready to have young when she is 2\u20133 years old. Young lions are called cubs. Cubs are born after 3 1/2 months. The cubs are born blind; their eyes do not open until they are about a week old, and cannot see well until they are about two weeks old. Lions do not have a den (home) where they would live for a long time. The lioness conceals the cubs in thick bush, gullies, or rocky outcrops. If the hiding place has been seen by other predators, then the lioness will move the cubs to a new hiding place. The cubs will be introduced to the pride at about 6 weeks old. The cubs are very vulnerable when the lioness goes out to hunt and needs to leave the cubs behind. Also, when a new male takes over a pride from another male, he usually kills all of the cubs. The cubs' mothers will then mate with the new pride male, which means that the first batch of new cubs will be his offspring. A litter of 2-6 cubs are born. Usually, only 1-2 cubs survive until introduced to the pride, at which point they are protected by the whole pride.\nIn zoos, lions have been known to breed with tigers. If the parents are a male lion and a female tiger, the offspring is called a liger. If the parents are a male tiger and a female lion, the offspring is called a tigon.\nLions in heraldry.\nLions appear in heraldry more often than any other animal. They traditionally symbolise courage, valour and royalty."}
{"id": "5716", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5716", "title": "Galatasaray S.K.", "text": "Galatasaray is a sports club in Istanbul, Turkey. They started in 1905.\nIn 2000, they became the first Turkish club to win both the UEFA Cup and the UEFA Super Cup in the same year.\nThe team's colors are red and yellow. Turkish people also call it \"Cim Bom\". Their mascot is a lion. The Turk Telecom Stadium is their stadium, and is also known as Aslantepe; Lion Hill. It is an all-seater stadium. It can hold 52,652 people.\nGalatasaray is one of the \"big five\" clubs in Turkey. The other clubs are Fenerbah\u00e7e, Be\u015fikta\u015f, Trabzonspor and Bursaspor. They have won the Spor Toto Super League 22 times and Ziraat Turkish Cup 18 times. As of January 2016, the Chairman is Mustafa Cengiz, and the coach is Fatih Terim."}
{"id": "5719", "revid": "7867334", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5719", "title": "B", "text": "B is the 2nd letter of the english alphabet. It's appearance depends on the writer's caligraphy. It has an uppercase and lowercase version like any other letters.\nThe letter B was already part of the Phoenician alphabet more than 3000 years ago in 1000 BCE. It's part of many alphabets today."}
{"id": "5720", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5720", "title": "C", "text": "C is the third (3rd) letter in the English alphabet and ISO basic latin alphabet."}
{"id": "5721", "revid": "598396", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5721", "title": "D", "text": "D is the fourth (number 4) letter in the alphabet. It is derived from the Greek Delta and the Phoenician Dalet"}
{"id": "5722", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5722", "title": "E", "text": "E is the fifth (number 5) letter in the English alphabet. \nIn English it has two main sounds when it is spoken. Usually it is a short E (\u0115), but sometimes it is a long E (\u0113). \nOne more thing in English is the so-called magic E. That is when a silent e at the end of a word makes the previous e long. Example: morpheme, which is pronounced as morph\u0113m.\nTypographic variants of E.\nThe variants of E include (but may not be limited to)\ncapital E\nlower-case e\n\u00e9 \u00c8 \u00e8 \u00ca \u00ea \u00cb\n\u00c9 \u00eb \u011a \u011b \u0112 \u0113\n\u0114 \u0115 \u0116 \u0117 \u0118 \u0119\n\"None\" of these variants is used in English, except occasionally \u00c9/\u00e9 for some French words.\nMeanings for E.\nThese meanings are for E/e as a separate letter."}
{"id": "5723", "revid": "1102549", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5723", "title": "F", "text": "F is the sixth letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5724", "revid": "7369395", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5724", "title": "G", "text": "G is the 7th (number 7) letter in the English alphabet (or Latin alphabet).u\nHistory.\nThe letter G was created in the third century BC by Spurius Carvilius Ruga. At the time, the letter C sounded like the \"c\" in \"cat\" and the \"g\" in \"girl\". To make the difference more clear, Ruga created the letter G. "}
{"id": "5725", "revid": "1026415", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5725", "title": "H", "text": "H () is the eighth (number 8) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5726", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5726", "title": "I", "text": "I is the ninth (9) letter in the English alphabet.\nIn English, I is a pronoun which means \"me\".\nIn Turkish, the letter I has two kinds, one with a dot (\u0130, i) and one without (I, \u0131)."}
{"id": "5727", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5727", "title": "J", "text": "J is the tenth (number 10) letter in the English alphabet. It comes before the letter K and after the letter I. The letter was not used in the Roman civilization until 16th Century."}
{"id": "5728", "revid": "8630", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5728", "title": "K", "text": "K is the eleventh (number 11) letter in the English alphabet.\nK or kappa is the tenth (number 10) letter in the Greek alphabet"}
{"id": "5729", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5729", "title": "L", "text": "L is the twelfth (number 12) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5730", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5730", "title": "M", "text": "M is the 13th letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5731", "revid": "618550", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5731", "title": "N", "text": "N is the fourteenth (number 14) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5732", "revid": "8630", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5732", "title": "O", "text": "O is the fifteenth (number 15) letter in the English alphabet and it has a shape of a circle."}
{"id": "5733", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5733", "title": "P", "text": "\"For technical reasons, :P redirects here. For the emoticon, see emoticons.\"\nP is the sixteenth (number 16) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5734", "revid": "73230", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5734", "title": "Q", "text": "Q is the seventeenth (number 17) letter in the English alphabet.\nSome people say that the letter Q is not needed, because the sound it makes can be made with \"K\" and \"W\" instead. The same sort of things are said about the letters \"X\" and \"C\".\nBelow are some ancient ways of writing \"Q\":"}
{"id": "5735", "revid": "829831", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5735", "title": "R", "text": "R is the eighteenth (number 18) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5736", "revid": "1128600", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5736", "title": "S", "text": "S is the nineteenth (number 19) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5737", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5737", "title": "T", "text": "T is the twentieth (number 20) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5738", "revid": "8630", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5738", "title": "U", "text": "U (u) is the twenty-first (21) letter in the English alphabet (it is also used as a short form for 'you')."}
{"id": "5739", "revid": "7480137", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5739", "title": "V", "text": "V is the twenty-second (number 22) letter in the English alphabet."}
{"id": "5740", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5740", "title": "W", "text": "W is the twenty-third (number 23) letter in the Latin alphabet. It is sometimes considered a vowel. In words like \"away, what, write and women,\" the W is a consonant. In words like \"draw\", \"few\", and \"low,\" the W is a vowel"}
{"id": "5741", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5741", "title": "X", "text": "X is the twenty-fourth (number 24) letter in the English alphabet. It sometimes makes a sound like \"ks\" (for example: \"exit\", \"next\", \"fox\"), or if it is at the beginning of a word, it makes a sound like \"zzz\" (for example: \"xylophone\")."}
{"id": "5742", "revid": "756599", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5742", "title": "Y", "text": "Y is the twenty-fifth (number 25) letter in the English alphabet. It is sometimes considered a vowel. In words like \"year\", \"yell\", and \"yes\", the Y is a consonant. In words like \"cry\", \"fly\", and \"sky\", the Y is considered a vowel.\nWhere it came from.\nSemitic, Phoenician, Greek and Latin.\n\"Y\" has appeared as the Semitic letter \"waw\". This was the first time it appeared in an alphabet. F, U, V, and W also come from the Semitic alphabet. The Greek and Latin alphabets used the Phoenician form of this early alphabet. There are similarities to the old English letter yogh (\u021c\u021d). The table shows where the letter \"y\" came from."}
{"id": "5743", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5743", "title": "Z", "text": "Z is the twenty-sixth (number 26) and last letter in the English alphabet. The small letter, z, is used as a lowercase consonant. Z is not used much. It is the most rarely used letter in the English language. The same letter of the Greek alphabet is named zeta.\nHow it is said.\nThe letter is said as either zed or zee. The first way of saying it comes from the Greek \"zeta\". In American English, its name is zee , because it comes from a late 17th century English speech.\nWhere it came from.\nSemitic.\nThe name of the Semitic symbol was \"zayin\" and was the seventh letter. It might have meant \"weapon\". It could have helped form English and French's \"z\".\nGreek.\nThe Greek form of Z was a close copy of the Phoenician symbol I. It stayed like this for a long time. The Greeks called it zeta, a new name made from the Greek letters \"eta\" (\u03b7) and \"theta\" (\u03b8).\nEtruscan.\nIn Etruscan, \"Z\" may have been .\nLatin.\nIn Old Latin, (written \"s\") became and the symbol for became useless. It was taken away from the alphabet by Appius Claudius Caecus, and a new letter, \"G\", was put in.\nIn the 1st century BC, \"Z\" was put in the alphabet again at the end of the Latin alphabet. This was done to accurately represent the sound of the Greek zeta. The letter \"Z\" appeared only in Greek words, and is the only letter besides \"Y\" that the Romans took from Greek."}
{"id": "5747", "revid": "407690", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5747", "title": "Fuck", "text": "Fuck is a common English language swear word. It can be used to either mean the act of sex or as an expression. However, the word \"fucking\" is used as an intensifier before a word (e.g \"fucking hell\")."}
{"id": "5757", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5757", "title": "Virus", "text": "A virus is a parasite that can only be seen under a microscope and can infect living organisms and cause disease. It can make copies of itself inside another organism's cells. Viruses consist of nucleic acid and a protein coat. Usually the nucleic acid is RNA; sometimes it is DNA. Viruses are able to cause many types of diseases, such as polio, ebola and hepatitis. Virology is the study of viruses. \nViruses reproduce by getting their nucleic acid strand into a prokaryote or eukaryote (cell). The RNA or DNA strand then takes over the cell machinery to reproduce copies of itself and the protein coat. The cell then bursts open, spreading the newly created viruses. All viruses reproduce this way, and there are no free-living viruses. Viruses are everywhere in the environment, and all organisms can be infected by them.\nViruses are so much smaller than bacteria. They were not visible until the invention of the electron microscope. A virus has a simple structure, it has no internal cellular structure, no cell wall or cell membrane, just the protein coat that holds the string of nucleic acid. Viruses live and reproduce in the cell which is why medication such as antibiotics cannot help fight against the virus as it cannot enter the cell without damaging the cell.\nWith eukaryotic cells, the virus protein coat is able to enter the target cells via certain cell membrane receptors. With prokaryote bacteria cells, the bacteriophage physically injects the nucleic acid strand into the host cell.\nViruses have the following characteristics: \nWhen the host cell has finished making more viruses, it undergoes lysis, or breaks apart. The viruses are released and are then able to infect other cells. Viruses can remain intact for a long time, and will infect cells when the time and conditions are right.\nSome special viruses are worth noting. Bacteriophages have evolved to enter bacterial cells, which have a different type of cell wall from eukaryote cell membranes. \"Envelope viruses\", when they reproduce, cover themselves with a modified form of the host cell membrane, thus gaining an outer lipid layer that helps entry. Some of our most difficult-to-combat viruses, like influenza and HIV, use this method.\nViral infections in animals trigger an immune response which usually kills the infecting virus. Vaccines can also produce immune responses. They give an artificially acquired immunity to the specific viral infection. However, some viruses (including those causing AIDS and viral hepatitis) escape from these immune responses and cause chronic infections. Antibiotics have no effect on viruses, but there are some other drugs against viruses.\nGenome.\nThere are a many genomic structures in viruses. As a group they have more structural genomic diversity than plants, animals, archaea, or bacteria. There are millions of different types of viruses, but only about 5,000 of them have been described in detail.49\nA virus has either RNA or DNA genes and is called an RNA virus or a DNA virus respectively. \"The vast majority of viruses have RNA genomes\". Plant viruses tend to have single-stranded RNA genomes and bacteriophages tend to have double-stranded DNA genomes.96/99\nReplication cycle.\nViral populations do not grow through cell division, because they do not have cells. Instead, they use the machinery and metabolism of a host cell to produce many copies of themselves, and they \"assemble\" (\"put together\") in the cell.\nThe life cycle of viruses differs greatly between species but there are six \"basic\" stages in the life cycle of viruses:75/91\nGenetic material and replication.\nThe genetic material within virus particles, and the method by which the material is replicated, varies considerably between different types of viruses.\nHost defence mechanisms.\nInnate immune system.\nThe body's first line of defence against viruses is the innate immune system. This has cells and other mechanisms which defend the host from any infection. The cells of the innate system recognise, and respond to, pathogens in a general way.\nRNA interference is an important innate defence against viruses. Many viruses have a replication strategy that involves double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). When such a virus infects a cell, it releases its RNA molecule. A protein complex called dicer sticks to it and chops the RNA into pieces. Then a biochemical pathway, called the RISC complex, starts up. This attacks the viral mRNA, and the cell survives the infection.\nRotaviruses avoid this by not uncoating fully inside the cell and by releasing newly produced mRNA through pores in the particle's inner capsid. The genomic dsRNA remains protected inside the core of the virion.\nThe production of interferon is an important host defence mechanism. This is a hormone produced by the body when viruses are present. Its role in immunity is complex; it eventually stops the viruses from reproducing by killing the infected cell and its close neighbours.\nAdaptive immune system.\nVertebrates have a second, more specific, immune system. It is called the adaptive immune system. When it meets a virus, it produces specific antibodies that bind to the virus and render it non-infectious. Two types of antibodies are important.\nThe first, called IgM, is highly effective at neutralizing viruses but is produced by the cells of the immune system only for a few weeks. The second, called IgG, is produced indefinitely. The presence of IgM in the blood of the host is used to test for acute infection, whereas IgG indicates an infection sometime in the past. IgG antibody is measured when tests for immunity are carried out.\nAnother vertebrate defence against viruses is cell-mediated immunity. It involves immune cells known as T cells. The body's cells constantly display short fragments of their proteins on the cell's surface, and, if a T cell recognises a suspicious viral fragment there, the host cell is destroyed by \"killer T\" cells and the virus-specific T-cells proliferate. Cells such as macrophages are specialists at this antigen presentation.\nEvading the immune system.\nNot all virus infections produce a protective immune response. These persistent viruses evade immune control by sequestration (hiding away); blocking antigen presentation; cytokine resistance; evading natural killer cell activity; escape from apoptosis (cell death), and antigenic shift (changing surface proteins). HIV evades the immune system by constantly changing the amino acid sequence of the proteins on the surface of the virion. Other viruses, called neurotropic viruses, move along nerves to places the immune system cannot reach.\nEvolution.\nViruses do not belong to any of the six kingdoms. They do not meet all the requirements for being classified as a living organism because they are not active until the point of infection. However, that is just a verbal point.\nObviously, their structure and mode of operation means they have evolved from other living things, and the loss of normal structure occurs in many endoparasites. The origins of viruses in the evolutionary history of life are unclear: some may have evolved from plasmids \u2013 pieces of DNA that can move between cells \u2013 while others may have evolved from bacteria. In evolution, viruses are an important means of horizontal gene transfer, which increases genetic diversity.\nRecent discoveries.\nA recent project discovered nearly 1500 new RNA viruses by sampling over 200 invertebrate species. \"The research team... extracted their RNA and, using next-generation sequencing, deciphered the sequence of a staggering 6 trillion letters present in the invertebrate RNA libraries\". The research showed that viruses changed bits and pieces of their RNA by a variety of genetic mechanisms. \"The invertebrate virome [shows] remarkable genomic flexibility that includes frequent recombination, lateral gene transfer among viruses and hosts, gene gain and loss, and complex genomic rearrangements\".\nLargest virus.\nA group of large viruses infect amoebae. The largest is \"Pithovirus\". Others in order of size are \"Pandoravirus\", then \"Megavirus\", then \"Mimivirus\". They are bigger than some bacteria, and visible under a light microscope.\nUses.\nViruses are used widely in cell biology. Geneticists often use viruses as vectors to introduce genes into cells that they are studying. This is useful for making the cell produce a foreign substance, or to study the effect of introducing a new gene into the genome. Eastern European scientists have used phage therapy as an alternative to antibiotics for some time, and interest in this approach is increasing, because of the high level of antibiotic resistance now found in some pathogenic bacteria."}
{"id": "5759", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5759", "title": "Microprocessor", "text": " &lt;ns&gt;0&lt;/ns&gt;\n &lt;revision&gt;\n &lt;parentid&gt;7819886&lt;/parentid&gt;\n &lt;timestamp&gt;2021-10-12T07:16:39Z&lt;/timestamp&gt;\n &lt;contributor&gt;\n &lt;username&gt;BRPever&lt;/username&gt;\n &lt;/contributor&gt;\n &lt;minor /&gt;\n &lt;comment&gt; edits by () to last version by ChenzwBot&lt;/comment&gt;\n &lt;model&gt;wikitext&lt;/model&gt;\n &lt;format&gt;text/x-wiki&lt;/format&gt;\nA microprocessor is an electronic component that is used by a computer to do its work. It is a central processing unit on a single integrated circuit chip containing millions of very small components including transistors, resistors, and diodes that work together. Some microprocessors in the 20th century required several chips. Microprocessors help to do everything from controlling elevators to searching the Web. Everything a computer does is described by instructions of computer programs, and microprocessors carry out these instructions many millions of times a second. \nMicroprocessors were invented in the 1970s for use in embedded systems. The majority are still used that way, in such things as mobile phones, cars, military weapons, and home appliances. Some microprocessors are microcontrollers, so small and inexpensive that they are used to control very simple products like flashlights and greeting cards that play music when opened. A few especially powerful microprocessors are used in personal computers.\nMicroprocessor operation.\nLike other central processing units, microprocessors use three steps commonly called Fetch, Decode, and Execute. In the Fetch step, an instruction is copied from the computer memory into the microprocessor. In the Decode step, the microprocessor figures out what operation the instruction is meant to do. In the Execute step, this operation is performed. Different computers can have different instruction sets."}
{"id": "5761", "revid": "7748598", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5761", "title": "Heat", "text": "Heat, or thermal energy is the sum of the kinetic energy of atoms or molecules. In thermodynamics, heat means energy which is moved between two things, when one of them has a higher temperature than the other thing. \nAdding heat to something increases its temperature, but heat is not the same as temperature. The temperature of an object is the measure of the average speed of the moving particles in it. The energy of the particles is called the internal energy. When an object is heated, its internal energy can increase to make the object hotter. The first law of thermodynamics says that the increase in internal energy is equal to the heat added minus the work done on the surroundings.\nHeat can also be defined as the amount of thermal energy in a system. Thermal energy is the type of energy that a thing has because of its temperature. In thermodynamics, thermal energy is the internal energy present in a system in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium because of its temperature. That is, heat is defined as a spontaneous \"flow of energy\" (energy in transit) from one object to another, caused by a difference in temperature between two objects; therefore, objects do not possess heat.\nProperties of Heat.\nHeat is a form of energy and not a physical substance. Heat has no mass.\nHeat can move from one place to another in different ways:\nThe measure of how much heat is needed to cause a change in temperature for a material is the specific heat capacity of the material. If the particles in the material are hard to move, then more energy is needed to make them move quickly, so a lot of heat will cause a small change in temperature. A different particle that is easier to move will need less heat for the same change in temperature.\nSpecific heat capacities can be looked up in a table, like this one.\nUnless some work is done, heat moves only from hot things to cold things.\nMeasuring heat.\nHeat can be measured. That is, the amount of heat given out or taken in can be given a value. The calorie is one of the units of measurement for heat but the joule is also used for all kinds of energy including heat.\nHeat is usually measured with a calorimeter, where the energy in a material is allowed to flow into nearby water, which has a known specific heat capacity. The temperature of the water is then measured before and after, and heat can be found using a formula."}
{"id": "5762", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5762", "title": "Shogun", "text": " is a military title in pre-Meiji period Japan. Shogun means \"general\" in the Japanese language. The full name was \"Seii Taishogun\" (Great General who fights against the Eastern savages and will win).\nIn the earlier times, Shogun were simply generals for emperors. The emperor had power over the shogun, choosing each shogun. Later however, the Shogun held much of the actual power. In 1192 a samurai, military leader Minamoto no Yoritomo got the title of Shogun from the last Emperor Go-Shirakawa. Excluding the later middle of the 16th century, Shogun was the real ruler of Japan.\nThe office of the Shogun is called the shogunate (\"bakufu\", meaning \"office in a tent\").- This is because Shogun had originally been military leaders and he had his office in a tent on a battle field.\nThere were three shogunates in Japan.\nIn 1868 the 15th Shogun of Tokugawa Shogunate, Tokugawa Yosinobu gave up his office. Then the time of Shogun rule ended. It was the end of the feudal time of Japan."}
{"id": "5763", "revid": "1047437", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5763", "title": "Bratislava", "text": "Bratislava is the capital city of Slovakia. About 450,000 people live there. It used to be called Pressburg (German) or Pozsony (Hungarian) and by some other names. Bratislava is the seat of national government, the presidency, and the parliament. It has several museums, galleries and of other educational, cultural and economic institutions.\nThere is a small Old Town, and a castle called Bratislavsk\u00fd Hrad. The Danube river goes through Bratislava. \nEtymology.\nBratislava had many names through its history. Here are some of them:\nand many others.\nGeography.\nBratislava is in the extreme southwest of Slovakia, on the borders with Austria and Hungary, and not far from the Czech Republic border. It is on the Morava and Danube rivers.\nHistory.\nPeople have lived here since the Neolithic age. The Celts inhabited this area from 400 BC-50 BC. The Roman Empire set up border military camps near Bratislava from the 1st century until the 5th century, for example \"Gerulata\". The Slavs started moving here from the 6th century. Bratislava was part of the Slavic empire called Great Moravia in the 9th century. From the second half of the 10th century until 1918, it was part of the Kingdom of Hungary, with some exceptions. It was even capital of the Kingdom between 1524 and 1830/1848. After the World War I ended in 1918, it was part of newly founded Czechoslovakia until 1939, when it became capital of World War II Slovak Republic until 1945. After 1945, it was part of Czechoslovakia again, becoming capital of Slovak Socialist Republic (which was still part of Czechoslovakia) in 1968. After the event called Velvet Divorce, when the Czechoslovakia broke up, Bratislava became capital of Slovakia.\nSightseeing.\nList of notable structures:\nEconomy.\nEconomy of Bratislava is prosperous and based on automobile industry, chemical industry and services. The unemployment (people without work) is lowest in Slovakia (around 2%, compared to the national average 7%). Approximately 250,000 people from all over the Slovakia travel to Bratislava for work.\nTransport.\nPosition of Bratislava made it a natural crossroads for international traffic. It is a motorway junction, rail junction, has its own international airport. The international river traffic passes along the Danube through Bratislava, with its own river port.\nBratislava has its own public transport system, with buses, trams and trolleybuses.\nTerritorial division.\nBratislava is divided into 5 national districts and 17 city parts: \nFurther it is divided into 20 cadastral areas, which are identical with the city parts with 2 exceptions:"}
{"id": "5770", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5770", "title": "Wellington", "text": "Wellington is the capital of New Zealand. It has been the capital since 1865. Before then Auckland was the capital. Wellington is the second largest city in New Zealand. It had about 448,000 people in 2006. Wellington is the southernmost capital city in the world.\nWellington is in the middle of New Zealand, at the south end of the North Island. South of Wellington is Cook Strait, the sea between the North Island and the South Island. The city has a lot of hills and a deep harbour. The middle of the city is busier than most small cities and is easy for people to walk around. \nIt was named for Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington. Wellington recently became famous because \"The Lord of the Rings\" movie trilogy was made there.\nClimate.\nThe city averages 2,068 hours of sunshine per year. The climate is a temperate marine one, (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\u202f\") is generally moderate all year round, and rarely sees temperatures above or below . The hottest recorded temperature is , while is the coldest. The city is notorious for its southerly blasts in winter, which may make the temperature feel much colder. It is generally very windy all year round with high rainfall; average annual rainfall is , June and July being the wettest months. Frosts are quite common in the hill suburbs and the Hutt Valley between May and September. Snow is very rare at low altitudes, although snow fell on the city and many other parts of the Wellington region during separate events in July and August 2011."}
{"id": "5771", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5771", "title": "Biochemistry", "text": "Biochemistry is the study of chemical reactions in living beings, and of biological molecules in general. It is important to cell biology and physiology. The study of biochemistry involves enzymes, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, sugars, proteins, and lipids. In the body, most of the molecules are polymers built of long chains of smaller molecules. Biochemistry studies the chemical transformations which produce these small building-block molecules, and which produce energy from food.\nMacromolecules.\nThe biologic polymers can have between tens of thousands to tens of millions of atoms, or more. These polymers are composed of many small molecules, each of which has no more than fifty atoms. These small molecules are made almost exclusively from carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. They also contain sulfur, phosphorus, and few other atoms, which are critical to the biological functioning of these polymers. \nThere are four types of macromolecules.\nNucleic Acids.\nNucleic acids are long-chain molecules which are of two kinds: DNA and RNA. Their building blocks are called nucleotides. \nDNA is found in every cell. It contains the information needed to make all of the nucleic acids, and all of the proteins. It is found joined up in a \"double helix\". It is the substance of heredity, and holds the information which life passes from generation to generation. \nRNA acts to make the information from DNA work inside the cells of the body. To make a particular protein the information in the DNA is transferred to an RNA molecule. Another RNA molecule uses this as a set of instructions for making the protein. The RNA which makes protein is called a ribosome and it acts as a ribozyme vastly increasing the speed with which the individual amino acids connect together to form the protein.\nProteins.\nProteins are polymers of amino acids. There are twenty different common types of amino acid. \nBroadly speaking, proteins have two kinds of function. The first is structural: they make up many of the key structures in cells and tissues. Muscle, hair, and skin are all mainly made of protein. The second is functional: as enzymes they greatly speed up the chemical reactions in a living cell. All cellular life consists of a thousand, or more, chemical reactions, called metabolism, which transform the molecules eaten into energy, or into other molecules the cell needs to survive. The function of proteins is to speed up these reactions, often by over a million times faster. In addition they cause chemical reactions to occur which would not without the action of the protein.\nCarbohydrates.\nCarbohydrates include sugars and starches. \nSugars are the simplest carbohydrates. The monosaccharides are \"single sugars\", such as glucose and fructose. The disaccharides are two monosaccharides joined together. Table sugar (cane sugar) is a disaccharide of glucose and fructose. The polysaccharides are made from many monosaccharids joined together. The vast majority of polysaccharides are polymers of glucose, and are of two types: starch and cellulose. Starch is the white stuff of grain, potatoes, apples, and bread, and is a readily available source of energy for the body. Cellulose is the structural material that holds up all plants. Half of the material that makes wood is cellulose.\nCarbohydrates have a number of functions in the body, but the most important is to act as a ready source of energy for the cell's metabolism. By breaking the chemical bonds in carbohydrates, energy is released and can be used by the body.\nLipids.\nLipids are fats, and waxes. Saturated lipids contain single bonds, and are found in butter and lard. Unsaturated lipids have one or more double bonds, and are often found in oils. The human body stores lipids as an energy source. When the body needs a large amount of energy, lipid molecules are broken down to release that energy."}
{"id": "5773", "revid": "1096394", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5773", "title": "Sadness", "text": "Sadness is an emotion. It is the opposite of happiness. People feel sad when something bad has happened, for example, if their mother or father has died. \nIn big letters, SAD, or S.A.D. is short for \"Seasonal Affective Disorder\". SAD is a sickness that some people have in the winter. They feel depressed as the nights become longer and there is less daylight.\nWhen people are very sad, and for a long time, the person could have a serious mental illness called depression or Bipolar disorder.\nNotes.\nIt is normally thought of as the opposite of happiness, but you can feel both happy and sad at the same time."}
{"id": "5775", "revid": "1130911", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5775", "title": "Microeconomics", "text": "Microeconomics is the science of how people make decisions at the small scale. It is different from macroeconomics which looks at how the economy works as a whole (\"on aggregate\"). In microeconomics, we might look at how a person chooses what to buy at the store, or how many things a company will make. Some parts of microeconomics include \"Consumer Theory\" and \"Theory of the Firm\", which study how people and businesses make decisions. Game theory looks at how people make decisions when the outcome (how something ends) depends on what decision another person makes; when agents are said to act \"strategically\".\nRelated pages.\n__NOEDITSECTION__"}
{"id": "5776", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5776", "title": "Port (disambiguation)", "text": "A port is a place at the edge of an ocean, river, or lake for ships to load and unload their cargo.\nIt can also refer to:"}
{"id": "5777", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5777", "title": "Cryptography", "text": "Cryptography, or cryptology, is the practice and study of hiding information. It is sometimes called code, but this is not really a correct name. It is the science used to try to keep information secret and safe. Modern cryptography is a mix of mathematics, computer science, and electrical engineering. Cryptography is used in ATM (bank) cards, computer passwords, and shopping on the internet.\nWhen a message is sent using cryptography, it is changed (or \"encrypted\") before it is sent. The method of changing text is called a \"code\" or, more precisely, a \"cipher\". The changed text is called \"ciphertext\". The change makes the message hard to read. Someone who wants to read it must change it back (or \"decrypt\" it). How to change it back is a secret. Both the person that sends the message and the one that gets it should know the secret way to change it, but other people should not be able to. Studying the cyphertext to discover the secret is called \"cryptanalysis\" or \"cracking\" or sometimes \"code breaking\".\nDifferent types of cryptography can be easier or harder to use and can hide the secret message better or worse. Ciphers use a \"key\" which is a secret that hides the secret messages. The cryptographic method needn't be secret. Various people can use the same method but different keys, so they cannot read each other's messages. Since the Caesar cipher has only as many keys as the number of letters in the alphabet, it is easily cracked by trying all the keys. Ciphers that allow billions of keys are cracked by more complex methods.\nSince the time of Caesar, many improved cyphers have been made. Some involved clever mathematics to resist clever cryptanalysis. During the 20th century computers became the principle tool of cryptography.\nSymmetric.\nIn a symmetric-key algorithm, both the sender and receiver share the key. The sender uses the key to hide the message. Then, the receiver will use the same key in the opposite way to reveal the message. For centuries, most cryptography has been symmetric. Advanced Encryption Standard is a widely used one. However this is not to be confused with symmetry.\nAsymmetric.\nAsymmetric cryptography is harder to use. Each person who wants to use asymmetric cryptography uses a secret number (a \"private key\") that is not shared, and a different number (a \"public key\") that they can tell everyone. If someone else wants to send this person a message, they'll use the number they've been told to hide the message. Now the message cannot be revealed, even by the sender, but the receiver can easily reveal the message with his secret or \"private key\". This way, nobody else needs to know the secret key.\nAsymmetric cryptography generally takes more time and requires more computer power, therefore it is not used most of the time. Instead, it is often used for computer signatures, when a computer must know that some data (like a file or a website) was sent from a certain sender. For example, computer software companies that release updates for their software can sign those updates to prove that the update was made by them, so that hackers cannot make their own updates that would cause harm. Websites that use HTTPS use an popular algorithm named RSA to create certificates, that show they own the website and that it is secure. Computers can also use asymmetric ciphers to give each other the keys for symmetric ciphers.\nComputers.\nComputers can calculate quickly. They can do very strong encryption, and most 21st century cryptography uses them. Examples are computer algorithms like RSA, AES, and there are many others. Using good algorithms like these can make it very hard to read the information that is sent.\nPeople.\nBecause people are slower than computers, any cryptography they use can probably be broken if enough of the secret way to change it is known.\nSimple forms of cryptography that people can do without machines are Caesar ciphers and transposition ciphers, but many other kinds were used before computers were used."}
{"id": "5780", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5780", "title": "Tuesday", "text": "Tuesday is the day of the week between Monday and Wednesday. In some countries, for example the United States of America, Tuesday is the third day of the week. In other parts of the world, Tuesday is the second day of the week.\nHistory of the name.\nThe name \"Tuesday\" comes from a Middle English word, \"Tiwesday\". This word came from the Old English word \"Tiwes d\u00e6g\". This was named after the Nordic god Tyr. Tyr was the God of War, like the Roman war god Mars, and Greek god Ares.\nIn Latin, \"Tuesday\" is called \"Martis dies\" which means \"Mars's Day\". In French, Spanish, Italian and Romanian, the (Romance languages), the word for \"Tuesday\" is nearly the same as the Latin name. Tuesday is \"mardi\" in French, \"martes\" in Spanish, \"marted\u00ec\" in Italian, \"dimarts\" in Catalan, and \"mar\u0163i\" in Romanian. \nThe Celtic languages still spoken use the Latin names, even though none of these languages came from Latin. Tuesday is \"d\u00e9 m\u00e1irt\" in Irish, \"Meurzh\" in Breton, \"dydd Mawrth\" in Welsh and \"Dim\u00e0irt\" in Scottish Gaelic. \nThe English and Scandinavian names for \"Tuesday\" come from the Nordic god Tyr (Old English \"Tiw\"):"}
{"id": "5781", "revid": "7450523", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5781", "title": "Wednesday", "text": "In some countries, like the United States of America, Wednesday is the fourth day of the week. In other parts of the world Wednesday is said to be the third day of the week.\nWednesday is named after the Norse god Woden."}
{"id": "5782", "revid": "7340903", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5782", "title": "Thursday", "text": "In some countries, like the United States of America, Thursday is the fifth day of the week. In other parts of the world Thursday is said to be the fourth day of the week. It comes after Wednesday and before Friday. Thursday is named after the Norse god Thor."}
{"id": "5783", "revid": "539376", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5783", "title": "Friday", "text": "Friday is a day of the week. In some countries, for example the United States, it is the sixth day of the week. In other parts of the world, for example the United Kingdom, it is said to be the fifth day of the week. Friday is the Sabbath for Muslims.\nThere is a superstition that a Friday on the 13th day of a month is unlucky. If the first day of a month is a Sunday, the month will have a Friday the 13th. \nSome people consider Friday to be the last day of the week before the weekend. Others see Friday night as part of the weekend, since work or school is over for the week. In some places, the weekend is Friday and Saturday. Because many people are happy to not have to go to work during the weekend, there are sayings like \"Thank God it's Friday!\".\nFriday is named after Norse Goddess Frigg."}
{"id": "5784", "revid": "1073251", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5784", "title": "Saturday", "text": "In some countries, like the United States of America, Saturday is the seventh and final day of the week. In other parts of the world, like the United Kingdom, Saturday is said to be the sixth day of the week. It is also the day of rest and worship for Jewish people. Along with Sunday, it makes up the weekend. Its name comes from the Roman god Saturn."}
{"id": "5789", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5789", "title": "Laos", "text": "Lao People's Democratic Republic or Laos (\u176e\u1762), is a country in southeast Asia. The capital of Laos is Vientiane.\nLaos is landlocked (it does not have a coast on a sea or ocean). It is bordered by Myanmar (used to be known in English as \"Burma\") and by China to the northwest, by Vietnam to the east, by Cambodia to the south and by Thailand to the west. The Mekong river forms a large part of the western boundary with Thailand. Boats from Laos cannot get to the ocean using the Mekong because of rapids and waterfalls in the south of the country.\nThe official language is Lao, a language belonging to the Tai language group. 98% of Lao people believe in Buddhism. The main crop in Laos is rice.\nGeography.\nLaos is the only landlocked country in Southeast Asia. The country is slightly smaller than Romania and Colorado. The landscape is mostly rugged mountains. The highest point is Phou Bia at . The Mekong River forms the border with Thailand. The mountains of the Annamite Range form the eastern border with Vietnam. The climate is tropical. The rainy season is from May to November. The dry season is from December to April. Laos has three seasons (rainy, cold and hot). The capital and largest city is Vientiane.\nHistory.\nFa Ngum created the first unified Lao Kingdom.\nLao became a French colony in 1893 and also became part of French Indochina. In 1949 it became independent from France, as the Kingdom of Laos. Later there was a civil war, and in 1975 it became a One-party state under the leadership of the communist party.\nProvinces.\nLaos is divided in 16 provinces and one prefecture.\nGovernment and politics.\nLaos is one of the world's five remaining communist states. The only legal political party is the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP). The head of state is President Choummaly Sayasone. He is the General Secretary of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party.\nShortly after the end of the Vietnam War, the North Vietnamese Army (NVA) joined forces with the Pathet Lao, started a coup on December 2, 1975 to overthrow the royalist Lao government, and established a communist government that continues to run the country to this day.\nThe current head of government is Prime Minister Thongloun Sisoulith, as of 2016. The current President is Bounnhang Vorachith. Government policies are determined by the party. Important government decisions are checked by the Council of Ministers."}
{"id": "5793", "revid": "8630", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5793", "title": "Yes", "text": "Yes is an English word that shows acceptance or agreement, or making a positive response or exclamation. It is the opposite of no.\nYes may also mean:\nIn music:\nIn other uses:"}
{"id": "5802", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5802", "title": "Stays", "text": ""}
{"id": "5803", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5803", "title": "Tightlacing corset", "text": ""}
{"id": "5804", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5804", "title": "Tight lacing", "text": ""}
{"id": "5805", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5805", "title": "Amaterasu", "text": "Amaterasu (), Amaterasu-\u014dmikami ( or ) or \u014chirume-no-muchi-no-kami (), is a goddess in Japanese mythology. She is the Sun Goddess, and the most sacred of all Shinto deities. Her name, \"Amaterasu\", means \"(that which) illuminates Heaven.\" Her shrine is at Ise.\nTradition.\nAmaterasu is the sister of Susano'o, the god of the sea and storms, and of Tsukuyomi, the god of the moon. All three were created from Izanagi, when he washed his face to clean the dirtiness of Yomi, the underworld. Amaterasu was born when Izanagi washed out his left eye, Tsukuyomi was born from the washing of the right eye, and Susano'o from the washing of the nose.\nStory.\nThe tales tell of great rivalry between Amaterasu and Susano'o. When he was to leave Heaven forever because Izanagi ordered him to, he went to say goodbye to his sister. Amaterasu, suspicious, proposed him a challenge: each of them was to turn an object of the other's into people. Amaterasu created three women from Susanoo's sword while he created five men from her necklace. Amaterasu said the men were hers because they were born of her necklace. Susano'o destroyed her rice fields, threw a dead pony into her loom, and killed one of her assistants in anger. For this, Amaterasu, sad, angry and scared, went to hide inside Ama-no-Iwato, the \"heavenly rock cave\", so the Sun was hidden and the world became dark for a long time. The Oni (devils of Japanese mythology) came out to the dark world, and the gods could not make Amaterasu come out of the cave.\nThe intelligent goddess of happiness, Ama-no-Uzume (\u5929\u5b87\u53d7\u58f2\u547d), took a big bucket, turned it upside down near the cave entrance, and began a dance on it, tearing off her clothing in front of the other Kami. They thought this was so funny that they laughed happily.\nAmaterasu heard them, and looked out to see why the gods were laughing. When she opened the cave, she saw her wonderful reflection in a mirror Uzume had put on a tree, and slowly came out of the cave.\nAt that moment, the god Ameno-Tajikarao (\u5929\u624b\u529b\u7537\u547d) closed the cave behind her, so she could not go back in. Another god tied a magic rope across the entrance. The sun goddess was then asked by the Kami Ame-no-Koyane (\u5929\u5150\u5c4b\u6839\u547d) to go back with the gods. She agreed, and light came back to the earth, but Susanoo was punished by being banished from Heaven."}
{"id": "5812", "revid": "1062923", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5812", "title": "Organism", "text": "An organism is an individual living thing. It is easy to recognize a living thing, but not so easy to define it. Animals and plants are organisms, obviously. Organisms are a biotic, or living, part of the environment. Rocks and sunshine are parts of the non-living environment.\nOrganisms usually have five basic needs to continue their metabolism. They need air, water, nutrient (food), energy, and a place to live. However, not all living things need all these at the same time. Many organisms do not need access to air at all.\nA little thought is needed about viruses. There is no agreement as to whether they should be regarded as living. They are made of protein and nucleic acid, and they evolve, which is a really important fact. However, they exist in two quite different phases. One phase is dormant, not active. The other is inside a living cell of some other organism. Then the virus is very active reproducing itself. Consider the parallel with a computer program. When in use it is active; when it is not, it is completely inactive. It is still a program all the same.\nAnother example from biology is the spore, which is a distribution phase of a bacteria, fungus or some plants. They are not active until they get to the right situation. They have all the working parts to build a complete organism, but for the moment it is switched off.\nSome organisms are made up of millions of cells. They are multicellular organisms. Many can be seen without using a microscope.\nMost organisms are so small that they cannot be seen with the naked eye. You need a microscope to see them. They are called microorganisms. Organisms can be made up of just one cell. They are called \"unicellular organisms\" or \"single celled organisms\". Examples include bacteria, and protozoa such as the \"Amoeba\" and \"Paramecium\".\nOrigin.\nThe Tree of Life project works on the relationships between living things. Identifying a LUCA (last universal common ancestor) is one of its main aims. The LUCA is estimated to have lived some 3.8 billion years ago (sometime in the Palaeoarchaean era).\nThe idea came from Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\", \"Therefore... probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form...\""}
{"id": "5813", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5813", "title": "Kinetic energy", "text": "Kinetic energy is the energy that an object has because of its motion. This energy can be converted into other kinds, such as gravitational or electric potential energy, which is the energy that an object has because of its position in a gravitational or electric field.\nDifference between Kinetic &amp; Potential Energy.\nKinetic Energy is the maximum amount of work a moving body due to its motion can do, whereas Potential energy is the maximum amount of work a body can do due to its configuration or position in a field force. Kinetic Energy is valid for all sorts of forces as seen from this derivation.\nbut Potential Energy is not as can be seen here\nwhich clearly suggests that only conservative forces can have potential energy associated with them. \nConversation of Energy.\nThe conversation of Energy is talking about the total Energy in a close system or isolated area is equal to zero. This implies that Kinetic Energy= Potential Energy= Zero \nK.E=P.E=0\nTranslational kinetic energy.\nThe translational kinetic energy of an object is:\nwhere\nRotational kinetic energy.\nThe rotational kinetic energy of an object is:\nwhere"}
{"id": "5814", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5814", "title": "Potential energy", "text": "Potential energy is the stored or pent-up energy of an object. It is often contrasted with kinetic energy. \nIn physics, potential energy is the energy which an object has due to its position in a force field or which a system has due to the way its parts are arranged. \nCommon types include the gravitational potential energy of an object that depends on its vertical position and mass, the elastic potential energy of an extended spring, and the electric potential energy of a charge in an electric field. The SI unit for energy is the joule (symbol J).\nPotential energy is often associated with restoring forces such as a spring or the force of gravity. The action of stretching the spring or lifting the mass is performed by an external force that works against the force field of the potential. This work is stored in the force field, which is said to be stored as potential energy. If the external force is removed the force field acts on the body to perform the work as it moves the body back to the initial position, reducing the stretch of the spring or causing a body to fall. When this happens, potential energy changes into kinetic energy. The total energy stays the same because of the law of conservation of energy.\nPhysicists say that potential energy is the difference between the energy of an object in a given position and its energy at a reference position.\nSimple examples.\nBringing a rock uphill increases its potential energy under gravity. Stretching a rubber band increases its elastic potential energy, which is a form of electric potential energy. A mixture of a fuel and an oxidant has a chemical potential energy, which is another form of electric potential energy. Batteries too have chemical potential energy.\nTypes of potential energy.\nThere are various types of potential energy, each associated with a particular type of force.\nGravitational potential energy.\nGravitational potential energy is experienced by an object when height and mass is a factor in the system. Gravitational potential energy causes objects to move towards each other. \nIf an object is lifted a certain distance from the surface from the Earth, the force experienced is caused by weight and height.\nWork is defined as force over a distance, and work is another word for energy. The potential energy added when you lift an object is:\nor\nHere, formula_5 is the acceleration due to gravity.\nThe total work done by gravitational potential energy when an object falls from position 1 to position 2 is:\nor\nElectric potential energy.\nElectric potential energy is experienced by charges both different and alike, as they repel or attract each other. Charges can either be positive (+) or negative (-), where opposite charges attract and similar charges repel.\nIf two charges were placed a certain distance away from each other, the potential energy stored between the charges can be calculated by:\nElastic potential energy.\nElastic potential energy is experienced when a rubbery material is pulled away or pushed together. A spring for example stores elastic potential energy. The amount of potential energy the material has depends on the distance pulled or pushed. The longer the distance pushed, the greater the elastic potential energy the material has.\nIf a material is pulled or pushed, the potential energy can be calculated by:"}
{"id": "5815", "revid": "8805", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5815", "title": "Seaport", "text": ""}
{"id": "5816", "revid": "7505357", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5816", "title": "Ship", "text": "A ship is a large vehicle used to travel on water. It is bigger than a boat. Most are cargo ships, which carry most of the world's international trade. There are also many warships, passenger ships and other kinds for different purposes.\nWhen people talk about a ship, they often use the pronoun \"she\". For example: She was launched on 29 December 1878.\nHistory.\nEarly ships.\nThe first ships used oars or the wind (or both) to make them move.\nFrom about 4000 BC the Ancient Egyptians were making wooden sail boats. By 1200\u00a0BC the Phoenicians and Greeks had begun to make bigger sailing ships which were about 30 metres (100\u00a0feet) long and could carry 90180 tonnes of cargo. The Romans made even bigger ships which could carry up to 1,000 people and 1,000 tonnes of cargo. The 8th century saw the rise of the Vikings, who were famous for their \"longships\" and which were mainly used for raiding other countries, but also for trading. The longships had flat bottoms so they could move in shallow (not deep) rivers.\nAge of sail.\nSailing ships were used for thousands of years, but they were very important from the Age of Discovery to the 19th century. The Chinese admiral Zheng He commanded a fleet of large 'treasure ships' on seven voyages all over Asia up to East-Africa in the early fifteenth century. The most successful and largest fleet in the 17th century was the Dutch fleet (see the Netherlands). For trade and transport the Dutch often used a particular kind of trading ship, called a flute (\"fluyt\" in Dutch). Transport of people and cargo on sailing ships became rare in the early 20th century.\nSome famous ships from this era include:\nThe age of steam.\nIn the 19th century, steamboats became commonplace.\nAt one time, the steamships \"Titanic\", \"Olympic\", and \"Britannic\" were the largest ships in the world, \"Titanic\" sank on her maiden voyage after hitting an iceberg, becoming one of the most famous shipwrecks of all time, the \"Olympic\" was \"Titanic\" 's nearly identical twin, and actually set sail before \"Titanic\" and was scrapped in the 1930s after a very successful career including her being a passenger liner and a warship in World War I. The \"Britannic\" was the largest of these three sister ships, and was supposed to be more grand and elegant than the \"Titanic\", but before she set sail on her maiden voyage, WWI broke out and she was stripped of her elegant furniture and elaborate paneling and became a hospital ship. During her term as a hospital ship, she was sunk by either a mine or torpedo, no one knows for sure. The \"Titanic\" lies at the bottom of the North Atlantic Ocean, off the coast of Nova Scotia, and the \"Britannic\" lies in the Aegean Sea, off the coast of the Island of Kea.\nModern ships.\nAfter World War II ships with diesel engines became commonplace. Passenger airliners replaced passenger ships for long trips in the late 20th century. Cargo ships became much bigger. The main kinds are container ships for mostly manufactured goods, and bulk carriers including oil tankers.\nLargest ship.\nThe world's largest ship is the \"Prelude\", owned by Shell. It is being built on Geoje Island, South Korea. It is 488m long and has the internal capacity greater than the total volume of four large aircraft carriers. What it will do is collect natural gas off the coast of Australia, and liquify it. When liquified, the hydrocarbon takes up 600 times less space than its gas. Smaller tankers will take the liquid gas to its buyers. The ship will do liquifying and temporary storage, which is usually done on land. Shell believes this justifies the cost of the ship.\nThe shipping yard builds all kinds of structures for the oil industry. It employs 30,000 workers."}
{"id": "5817", "revid": "837177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5817", "title": "Boat", "text": "A boat is a vehicle used to travel on water. It is smaller than a ship and can be lifted out of the water and carried on a ship. Some boats have sails, some are powered by rowing with oars, and some use motors. Those that use steam engines are steamboats\nThese boats are usually made of wood. However, some parts are made of metals like steel and aluminium. Expensive boats may have parts from fiberglass or composite materials and some even have helicopter pads. There are some boats that can even go underwater. They are called submarines.\nA narrowboat is a boat designed to be used on narrow canals. It is sometimes called a barge.\nHistory.\nThe Pesse Canoe is likely the oldest boat recovered to date as it was built sometime around 8,000 BCE"}
{"id": "5818", "revid": "1143240", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5818", "title": "Navy", "text": "The navian is the part of a country's military that fights on water using boats. People in the navy are called navians. The navy is mostly made up of warships. It may also have its own air force and soldiers. It may have special boats that can go underwater, called submarines, or another kind of special boat that is meant to carry airplanes, called aircraft carriers. \nHistory.\nOriginally, Naval war was fought by ramming other ships and then jumping onto them to fight the crew. In Ancient Greece and Rome, the ships were usually powered by oars. During the Middle Ages, the cannon was invented. These could be shot at other ships from a great distance. Warships around this time also began to use sails instead of oars for power. In the middle 19th century, ships began to be plated in armor for protection. Steam engines allowed them move while carrying the armor, and better ones soon made them much faster. These early warships, called ironclads, are thought to have begun the type of Naval warfare used today. Ships soon became much larger."}
{"id": "5819", "revid": "859102", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5819", "title": "Air force", "text": "An air force is the branch of a country's military which fights in the air. The air force is made up of aircraft such as fighters, bombers, helicopters and transport aircraft. When a navy has its own air force it is called Naval Aviation. \nAir forces began in the early 20th century, usually as part of the army. Most countries separated their air forces in the 1930s and 1940s. \nAircraft in an air force sometimes fly in a formation. Formations are when the aircraft fly in a pattern. Air forces is part of the military.\nThe biggest air force in the world is the United States Air Force (USAF)."}
{"id": "5820", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5820", "title": "Snail mail", "text": ""}
{"id": "5821", "revid": "7889208", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5821", "title": "List of words about computers", "text": ""}
{"id": "5824", "revid": "152427", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5824", "title": "Adware", "text": "Adware is an advertising computer program that can be put there by other people on someone's computer, sometimes without their permission. It is controversial because sometimes businesses put the program there so they can see what people are doing or what web pages they are browsing. They then put an advertisement that is of the same subject as the web-page the person is looking at. This can be good if the person is trying to buy something, but many people do not want advertisements. Many people also do not want other people to find out what they are doing or what web pages they are looking at. An example is in the popular peer-to-peer file sharing program, Kazaa. When someone downloads it, it installs adware on their computer that then sends advertisements to the computer. Some people do not like this so they use an illegally changed version of this program called Kazaa Lite.\nRemoval tools.\nRemoval tools have been developed to assist users in clearing out these unwanted programs.\nLike many programs that people use for security, the program must be changed often. Updating allows the removal tool to recognize new types of adware. This can be done by downloading files over the internet using the 'update' option in the program."}
{"id": "5825", "revid": "552", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5825", "title": "Adaware", "text": ""}
{"id": "5828", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5828", "title": "Gender", "text": "Gender is a word that is used to talk about how people express masculine (traits most people think of as male) or feminine (traits most people think of as female) traits. It is commonly used for a person's sex (male or female) but this word only means someone\u2019s biology (body parts).\nDefinitions and history.\n\"Gender\" comes from the Latin word genus which meant \"kind\" or \"type\". In the few hundred years before the 1950s, the term 'gender' was used only in the field of grammar. In 1955, a scientist began to use the word \"gender\" in new ways when referring to people, in a way that was related to their 'sex' but not quite the same. The term was not applied to other animals. They continued to have different \u201csexes\u201d.\nGrammar.\nBefore the 1950s, the term 'gender' was used only in the field of grammar, and only to distinguish a category of words that are called 'feminine nouns' from other words that are 'masculine nouns'.[1][2] Early Indo-European languages~had three genders. Languages that come from Latin like Spanish, French, and Italian have lost one, and their nouns are either feminine or masculine in gender. For example, in Spanish, 'house' (\"casa\") is feminine, and 'day' (\"d\u00eda\") is masculine. Some languages still have three genders, like German. Outside of their grammatical category, the word 'gender' was not used to refer to people. At that time, when one spoke about someone being either 'male' or 'female', the word used was \"sex\". \nPronouns.\nMerriam Webster officially recognized the pronoun \"they\" as a singular use pronoun in 2019. According to the dictionary, the word had actually been used as a non-gender binary pronoun since the 1300s. Around the time Merriam Webster made this announcement, artist Sam Smith announced that their correct pronouns were actually they/them. Typically, for those who identify as female, the correct pronouns are she/her, and for males, he/him. \nSee Grammatical gender for more detail.\nThe Difference Between Sex and Gender.\nMany people often use the terms \"sex \" and \"gender\" interchangeably, however, some people now assign them two different meanings. They use the term \"sex\" to refer to the biological assignment of an individual, which is often based on scientific knowledge. This biological determination is often made at birth. Doctors often assign sex by looking at pre-natal images or directly inspecting genitalia at birth. This determination is still based on our beliefs on gender and sex being the same. The problem lies in what happens when an individual falls outside of the typical categories of \"male\" or \"female\". Some medical professionals have turned to the Karyotype method to look at the sex chromosomes to determine biological sex. \"Gender\", on the other hand, is considered by some to be more of a psychological factor. To them, gender is determined by our expressions, and behaviors rather than scientific knowledge. \nGender as a Social Construct.\nTypically, gender has been described by using terms such as man, woman, or even transsexual. These terms are applied to people based on their sex, or sometimes on the basis of culturally constructed characteristics. Although many people may be biologically assigned a sex, the gender they believe themselves to be may not align with this sex. An individual's gender is often assumed by outsiders based on cultural norms: outward appearance, body shape and size, physical activity, etc.. Although an individual's gender identity is determined by psychology, a gender identity can be constructed by wearing particular clothing, language, actions and such, that are associated with that gender in a given society. Psychologist and Feminist Anthropologist Anne Fausto-Sterling calls this embodiment.\nGender roles.\nIn 1955, John Money created the term gender role and began to use it to mean something different from sex. Gender roles are how a society views different genders and how they should act. An example of this would be how some people believe feminine or female people should cook and clean rather than play sports. These roles change over time and differ based on different cultures, but are often ideas that are created by people rather than coming from nature.\nGender Identity Development.\nThe term identity means the mental image someone has of themself as well as some kind of similarity with others in some particular way. Gender identity, specifically, refers to the experiences someone has that are similar to a person of a particular gender. This gender identity affects how a person views themself as well as how they interact with others. Developmental psychologists have found that the development of an identity begins in early adolescence. Learning about what it means to be a particular gender also starts at an early age. During adolescence, children begin to internalize the gender roles in their surroundings and \"gender intensification\" occurs. Gender intensification means that the child feels more pressure to conform to socially sanctioned gender norms, resulting in deeper gender role differentiation for boys and girls. Biological, can affect gender identity development as well. Research done with animals has shown that pre-natal sex hormones affect the sexual differentiation of the brain. \nGender and Sexual Orientation.\nGender binary.\n\u2018Binary\u2019 comes from the Latin word bini meaning two together. As such binary refers to an idea in which there are only two possible options that are often opposite. This is how most people thought of gender throughout history in many parts of the world with male and female being the only two options.\nThinking of gender in this way can lead to a society with strict gender roles that are in place for a long time to think that those are natural or biological roles that each option has to conform to at birth. Examples of this are women who are not allowed access to education or jobs or men who are expected to not be emotional or soft. Strict binary gender roles are also often tied to reasons for oppression of sexualities outside of the majority. Societies often enforce gender binaries due to concepts like tradition and the idea that their stability relies on keeping this binary in place.\nThe LGBTQ+ Community.\nThe term LGBTQ is constantly evolving and adding terms to the acronym as knowledge of the community becomes more widely known. As of 2020, the acronym has expanded to LGBTQQIAAP, which stands for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Queer, Questioning, Intersex, Asexual, Ally, and Pansexual. The community is, however, mostly referred to as the LGBTQ+ community. \nIntersex.\nIntersex is the word used to describe the condition where a person has genitals that are not clearly male or female. There is a variety of ways this condition may physically manifest including infants that have enlarged clitorises or a combination of elements of both the male and female genitalia. Sex assignment is often performed on infants that have obvious intersex characteristics, this is often referred to as intersex genital mutilation. Some have recently suggested that medically unnecessary surgeries such as intersex genital mutilation be delayed until the child is old enough to make a medically informed decision with counseling. Many intersex individuals may even go their whole lives without knowing that they are intersex due to a chromosomal abnormality. Typically, females' sex chromosomes are XX and males XY, however, XXY (Klinefelter syndrome), XXXY, XXXXY, and XYY are some other possibilities. \nGender spectrum.\nAlthough many societies still exist under a gender binary, more and more around the world are becoming more accepting of ideas of gender outside of strict male and female categories. An important thing to know about gender in this form is that the people who exist within them have always existed but have not always been free to express themselves. One example of this is people who are transgender, those who were labeled based on their biological sex, but eventually come to realize that label does not fit what they identify with. In addition to this, some people do not experience gender in a way that fits into a binary at all, and these people are called either non binary or genderqueer.\nAnother category that is not a part of the gender binary is called intersex. Intersex people are born without obviously male or female genitalia. It is a common practice in hospitals that an intersex baby will have a surgery that makes them one sex. Doctors do this with the belief it will help the child later on in life as they begin to develop during puberty. However, it can cause mental and emotional issues for the child if they begin to struggle with gender identity. Intersexuality is not a well accepted or understood idea in most places, since most people have never heard of it or are willing to accept people who are."}
{"id": "5838", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5838", "title": "Basic English Ordered Wordlist", "text": ""}
{"id": "5843", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5843", "title": "Dutch language", "text": "Dutch () is a West Germanic language. It comes from the Netherlands and is the country's official language. It is also spoken in the northern half of Belgium (the region called Flanders), and in the South American country of Suriname. A language known as \"Afrikaans\" was developed from Dutch by the people in southern Africa and is now spoken mainly in South Africa but also in nearby Namibia. About 22 million people around the world speak Dutch.\nHistory.\nDutch is a West Germanic language The West Germanic branch is divided into English, Frisian, German and Dutch. Dutch has a similar vocabulary and grammar to English but is closer to German.\nThe North Germanic languages of Danish, Norwegian, Swedish and Icelandic are also part of the Germanic language branch. Dutch is also in some cases like those languages.\nThe Dutch of before 1170 is called \"Old Dutch\" (Oudnederlands). The Dutch between 1170 and 1500 is called \"Middle Dutch\" (Middelnederlands), which is also called \"Diets\" and so that is why it is called Dutch in English. The word \"Dutch\" itself came from the Proto-Germanic word \"\", which means \"language of the common people\" and then was also used to refer to the Germans and their language. Over time, the Modern English usage now refers to that the Netherlands, not the Germans. The Dutch word for German, \"Duits\", comes from the same origin.\nThe oldest Dutch book known is \"Wachtendonckse Psalmen\", which was written in 900. The first Dutch writer known by name is Hendrik van Veldeke, who was born around 1150.\nLetters.\nDutch uses the letters of the same Roman alphabet as English.\nVowels.\nNote: The e can also be a schwa (like in \"the\")\nOpen and closed syllables.\nVowels are said differently on the if the syllable is \"open\" or \"closed\". If a syllable is open, short written vowels are said as long ones. However, short written vowels are said short if the syllable is closed.:\nThere is, however, an exception to this rule. This is the \"e\". This is because \"e\" can also be a \"mute e\" (Schwa) (IPA character \u0259). In most words, where an open syllable ends with e it is a short e. Therefore, open syllables with a long e (ee) are written as ee. Example:\nThere are, however, exceptions to this rule as well. This can be seen in the word \"meenemen\". This word can be divided into three syllables: mee|ne|men. The e's in the first two syllables are long ones, but the last one is a mute e.\nThe mute e also occurs in the ending of verbs (usually -en).\nConsonants.\nNote: In words that end with \"-d\", the \"-d\" is pronounced like \"-t\".\nGrammar.\nThe grammar of Dutch is slightly more complex than that of English. Word order in sentences is different in complex sentences. The basic simple sentence-structure is subject-verb.\nVerbs.\nDutch has few grammatical \"tenses\". These are most used:\nOnvoltooid tegenwoordige tijd.\nThe most simple verb-time is the onvoltooide tegenwoordige tijd (ott; present simple). The ott is used when something happens \"now\", or \"regularly\" (like \"Hij eet regelmatig\" (He eats regularly)). Most verbs are conjugated (changed) in a regular form (these verbs are called \"regelmatige werkwoorden\" (regular verbs)). The word stem of the verb is still there in all of the conjugations (verb changes). The correct way of doing so is\nNote: The stem of a verb is the infinitive of the verb without the \"-en\". In some verbs, the first syllable is open and so any vowel is long. The stem changes to a written long vowel so the stem of \"lopen\" becomes \"loop\". If the \"-en\" is then added to the stem (like with \"wij\"), the written form becomes short again, but it is still said as a long vowel).\nOnvoltooid verleden tijd.\nThe past form of the ott is the \"onvoltooid verleden tijd\" (ovt; past simple). How verbs are conjugated (changed) in the ovt is not easy to understand. Mistakes are common because some verbs are add a D, but others add a T. The \"'t kofschip\" rule is that the verb without \"-en\" (the stem in most verbs) ends with a consonant, which is also in \"'t kofschip\", the verb is changed with a T:\nThe verb can now be changed as the following:\nThere are some words for wgjch \"'t kofschip\" is not so easy. In \"vrezen\" (to fear), the stem of the verb is \"vrees\" and it looks as if itvis changed with a T. However, it changes instead to a D because \"vrezen\" without \"-en\" is \"vrez\". The Z is not in \"'t kofschip\" and so the verb is changed to a D.\nThe verb can now be changed as follows:\nContinuating verbs.\nAlthough Dutch has \"present continuous\" (the -ing form of verbs in English), it is not used often:\nActually, there are three types of continuous verbs in Dutch. \nExamples.\n \" hallo \" (hello)\n \" Ik heet ... \" (my name is...)\n \" Ik hou van je \" (I love you)\n \" ja \" (yes)\n \" nee \" (no)\nNumbers.\n \" een \" (one)\n \" twee \" (two)\n \" drie \" (three)\n \" vier \" (four)\n \" vijf \" (five)\n \" zes \" (six)\n \" zeven \" (seven)\n \" acht \" (eight)\n \" negen \" (nine)\n \" tien \" (ten)\n \" elf \" (eleven)\n \" twaalf \" (twelve)\nIn number with three digits (e.g. 100), the Dutch change the u into o and replace 1 of the r's. Example:"}
{"id": "5852", "revid": "825289", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5852", "title": "Creative Commons licenses", "text": "The Creative Commons licenses relates to the name of several copyright licenses released on December 16, 2002. The licenses were released by \"Creative Commons\", a United States nonprofit corporation. Everybody can put their own creations under these licenses.\nThere are four basic license conditions. A simple overview of these four:\nIt is possible to combine the license elements to allow people to use a work under certain conditions. For example, a combination of the first and fourth is called \"CC BY-SA\". This stands for \"Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike\". With this license other people can use the work for free, but they must give credit to the original creator, and when they make something new with the work they must give it the same \"CC BY-SA\" license.\nCriticism.\nThe Free Software Foundation thinks that the Creative Commons system is confusing, because people often forget to tell which of the licenses they use. Instead they suggest to use the Free Art license."}
{"id": "5887", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5887", "title": "Adaware SE", "text": ""}
{"id": "5888", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5888", "title": "Marshall Islands", "text": "The Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) is a Micronesian island nation in the western Pacific Ocean. The capital of Marshall Islands is Majuro. The official languages are Marshallese and English.\nNational Anthem: Forever Marshall Islands\nRoughly 10% of the population of the Marshall Islands can now be found in northwest Arkansas, U.S. Most live and work in the city of Springdale, a community of roughly 50,000. Each year, the Marshallese host a homecoming event so friends and relatives can get together to celebrate, stay in touch with politics at home, and spread their island culture. They meet at the Jones Center for Families in Springdale and have dancing, feasting, volleyball, and basketball. As a population, they are devoted to family and church and bring island dance and song to this corner of Arkansas."}
{"id": "5892", "revid": "1145070", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5892", "title": "Alphabet", "text": "An alphabet is a writing system, a list of symbols for writing. The basic symbols in an alphabet are called \"letters\". In an alphabet, each letter is a symbol for a sound or related sounds. To make the alphabet work better, more signs assist the reader: punctuation marks, spaces, standard reading direction, and so on.\nThe name \"alphabet\" comes from \"Aleph\" and \"Beth\", the first two letters in the Phoenician alphabet.\nThis article is written with the Roman alphabet (or Latin alphabet). It was first used in Ancient Rome to write Latin. Many languages use the Latin alphabet: it is the most used alphabet today. The alphabet has 26 letter/ symbols.\nAlphabets.\nIt seems that the idea of an alphabet \u2013 a script based entirely upon sound \u2013 has been copied and adapted to suit many different languages. Although no alphabet fits its language perfectly, they are flexible enough to fit any language approximately. The alphabet was a unique invention.p12\nThe Roman alphabet, the Cyrillic, and a few others come from the ancient Greek alphabet, which dates back to about 1100 to 800.p167 The Greek alphabet was probably developed from the Phoenician script, which appeared somewhat earlier, and had some similar letter-shapes.\nThe Phoenicians spoke a Semitic language, usually called Canaanite. The Semitic group of languages includes Arabic, Maltese, Hebrew and also Aramaic, the language spoken by Jesus. We do not know much about how the alphabetic idea arose, but the Phoenicians, a trading people, came up with letters which were adapted by the early Greeks to produce their alphabet. The one big difference is that the Phoenician script had no pure vowels. Arabic script has vowels which may, or may not, be shown by diacritics (small marks above or below the line). The oldest Qu'ran manuscripts had no diacritics. Israeli children to about the third grade use Hebrew texts with vowel 'dots' added.p89\nNo ancient script, alphabetic or not, had pure vowels before the Greeks. The Greek alphabet even has two vowels (Eta) and Epsilon) for 'e' and two (Omega and Omicron) for 'o', to distinguish between the long and short sounds. It appears that careful thought went into both the Phoenician invention and the Greek adaptation, but no details survive of either process.\nSemitic scripts apparently derive from \"Proto-Sinaitic\", a script of which only 31 inscriptions (plus 17 doubtful) are known. It is thought by some researchers that the original source of this script was the Egyptian hieratic script, which by the late Middle Kingdom (about 1900) had added some alphabetic signs for representing the consonants of foreign names. Egyptian activity in Sinai was at its height at that time. A similar idea had been suggested many years previously.\nShort list of alphabets.\nA list of alphabets and examples of the languages they are used for:\nOther writing systems.\nOther writing systems do not use letters, but they do (at least in part) represent sounds. For example, many systems represent syllables. In the past such writing systems were used by many cultures, but today they are almost only used by languages people speak in Asia. A \"syllabary\" is a system of writing that is similar to an alphabet. A syllabary uses one symbol to indicate each syllable of a word, instead of one symbol for each letter of the word. For example, a syllabary would use one symbol to mean the syllable \"ga\", instead of two letters of the alphabet \"g\" and \"a\".\nOriginally, 1200 BC in the Shang dynasty, Chinese characters were mainly \"pictographic\", using pictures to show words or ideas. Now only 1% of Chinese characters are pictographic.p97 97% of modern characters are SP characters. These are a pair of symbols, one for meaning (semantics) and the other for pronunciation.p99 In many cases the P and S parts are put together into one joint character. Chinese is not one spoken language, but many, but the same writing system is used for all. This writing system has been reformed a number of times."}
{"id": "5893", "revid": "6914471", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5893", "title": "County", "text": "A county is the name for a piece of land. It has a different meaning in different languages. Originally the word was for the land under a count (in Great Britain an earl). Today a \"county\" is often something between a larger state and a smaller town or district.\nCounty governments keep records and organize elections and laws. They are a kind of local government.\nCanada.\nCanada has ten provinces. Five of them have counties in them. In Ontario, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick, these are local government units, but in Quebec and Prince Edward Island they are now only geographical units. \nChina.\nThe word \"county\" is the English name for the Chinese word \"xi\u00e0n\" (\u53bf or \u7e23). On Mainland China under the People's Republic of China, counties are the third level of local government. On Taiwan, the county is the highest governmental level below the Republic of China central government. \nThere are about 2,000 counties in China; this number is about the same as in the Han dynasty, 2,000 years ago. The county is one of the oldest levels of government in China.\nIn the past, \"prefecture\" and \"district\" were names for \"xi\u00e0n\", before the Republic of China. People started using the English name \"county\" after the start of the Republic of China.\nThe head of a county is the magistrate.\nCroatia.\nCounties started to be units of regional self-government in Croatia in 1990. There are twenty counties and the city of Zagreb which has the same status. They are called \"\u017eupanije\" and their leader is a \"\u017eupan\".\nFrance.\nThere was a change in the historical counties of France in 1790 after the Revolution. The new government unit was the \"d\u00e9partement\". But French people use the word county (comt\u00e9) in the name of the Free County region, the old Free County of Burgundy. \nHungary.\nThe government unit of Hungary is \"megye\", or in Latin: \"comitatus\". This is the same as the word \"county\". Today Hungary has 19 counties, 20 city counties and 1 capital, Budapest. The comitatus was also the unit in the Kingdom of Hungary.\nIreland.\nIreland originally had 32 counties in the nineteenth century. 26 of these later formed the Republic of Ireland and 6 formed Northern Ireland. The counties were in 4 provinces - Leinster (12 counties), Munster (6) Connacht (5) and Ulster (9). \nIn the 1970s in Northern Ireland and in the 1990s in the Republic of Ireland, there was a change in the county numbers and borders (where they started and finished). In the Republic, for example, the change broke Dublin County into four parts: Dublin City, D\u00fan Laoghaire - Rathdown, Fingal, and South Dublin. 'County Tipperary' is really two counties, Tipperary North Riding and Tipperary South Riding. The towns Cork, Galway, Limerick, and Waterford are now separated from the countryside areas of their counties. So the Republic of Ireland now has thirty-four \"county-level\" units. But for sports, culture etc. people normally talk about the original 32 counties and 4 provinces.\nEach county has a flag/colours and often a nickname too.\nJapan.\n\"County\" is one name for \"gun\" (\u90e1), which is a part of a prefecture. Other names for \"gun\" are \"rural district\", \"rural area\" or \"district\". People do not like to use \"district\" because the usual translation of \"district\" is \"choume\" (\u4e01\u76ee). \nToday, \"counties\" have no political power or organisation use. Postal services use it.\nNew Zealand.\nAfter New Zealand ended its provinces in 1876, they began using a county system as in other countries. They used it until 1989.\nDuring the second half of the 20th century, many people went to the country counties from nearby cities. Because of this, sometimes they put the two together, making a \"district\" (e.g. Rotorua). Or sometimes they changed the name to \"district\" (e.g. Waimairi) or \"city\" (e.g. Manukau).\nIn 1974 they had a big change; they made the organisation the same all over New Zealand. Today the country has cities and districts, but no counties.\nNorway.\nNorway has 19 Counties (singular \"fylke\", plural \"fylker\", literally \"folk\"). Until 1972, Bergen was a county, but today it is a municipality in the county of Hordaland. All counties have municipalities (singular \"kommune\", plural \"kommuner\"). \nEach county has an assembly (\"fylkesting\"). Norwegians choose the people in the assembly every 4 years. The counties work with high schools and roads, etc. Some people, and political parties, such as the Conservatives, \"H\u00f8yre\", want the end of the counties. Others want to make some of them into larger regions.\nPoland.\nIn English we normally call the Polish second-level organisation unit \"powiat\" a \"county\" or \"district\".\nRomania.\nThe smaller units of Romania are called \"jude\u0163\" (plural: \"jude\u0163e\"). This name comes from \"jude\", a judge of a city. Today Romania has 40 counties and the capital, Bucharest has a separate status. \nSerbia.\nWe sometimes call the units of Serbia (\"okrug\") counties, but more often we call them districts. \nSweden.\nIn 1634 the old provinces in Sweden had a new name: counties. Today there are 21 Counties, and in each County there are Municipalities. \nThe Swedish name is \"L\u00e4n\".\nUnited Kingdom.\n\"See also List of counties of the United Kingdom\"\nIn the United Kingdom there are 92 traditional counties (also known as shires), 86 in Great Britain and 6 in Northern Ireland. The British counties are different ages.\nIn England, in Anglo-Saxon times, \"Shires\" were units for getting taxes. They usually had a town at their centre. People called these towns the \"shire town\". The shires had the same name as their shire town (for example Bedford\"shire\"). Later people called these towns the \"county town\". The name \"county\" came from the Normans, from a Norman word for an area under a Count (lord).\nIn 1539 Wales got thirteen counties. The counties in Scotland are this age or older.\nThe county boundaries (borders) of England are different today. In medieval times, some important cities got the status of counties, for example London, Bristol and Coventry. Some small places, e.g. Islandshire, were also counties. In 1844, a lot of these small places returned to their old counties.\nUnited States.\nThe name \"county\" is also used in 48 of the 50 states of the United States, for the next government unit smaller than the state. Louisiana uses the name \"parishes\" and Alaska uses \"boroughs\". The U.S. Census Bureau lists 3,141 counties or organisation units of this sort. The power of the county government is very different in every state.\nIn New England, counties are mostly for law. In Connecticut, Massachusetts and Rhode Island, they have no governmental use; they are only geographic names. Most power is in the New England town. \nIn other places than New England, counties are for the police, water, gas and electricity, libraries, statistics and birth certificates. \"County sheriffs\" are the head of the police in some states, for areas outside of cities and towns. Other places have \"County Police\" and county sheriffs are for law. Each county has a \"county seat\", usually the biggest town, where the county offices are. \nIn Western states, for example California, the county is the basic unit of local government."}
{"id": "5894", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5894", "title": "New York University", "text": "New York University, also known as NYU, is a research university in New York City. It is the largest private university in the United States, and is highly regarded in the nation as well as around the world.\nRankings.\nIn 2020, it was ranked as the 11th best university in the United States by the QS World University Rankings: USA, and as the 28th best university in the world by U.S. News &amp; World Report. In addition, NYU is highly ranked in the fields of Law, Medicine, Mathematics, Business, Psychology, Communications, Performing Arts, Film, Economics, and Philosophy.\nHistory.\nThe university was founded as \"University of the City of New York\" in 1831 by a prominent group of New York City residents led by then United States Secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin. The school was officially renamed New York University in 1896.\n37 Nobel Prize winners have been produced by NYU, the 12th most in the United States and 19th most in the world. Three heads of state attended NYU: Ma Ying-jeou of the Republic of China, Ephraim Katzir of Israel, and Guillermo Endara of Panama. Many American politicians also attended NYU, including Bill de Blasio, Carol Bellamy, and Rudy Giuliani. Many successful actors and movie directors attended NYU, including Martin Scorcese, Angelina Jolie, Alec Baldwin, Spike Lee, Ang Lee, Mahershala Ali, Woody Allen, and Adam Sandler. Other famous alumni include the creator of the polio vaccine Jonas Salk, singer Lady Gaga, Twitter founder Jack Dorsey, author Suzanne Collins, and former special counsel Robert Mueller.\nNYU is one of the places where 5G was created, as well as where many of the foundations of modern electromagnetic theory were discovered.\nCampus.\nIn addition to its main campus in New York City, NYU also has degree-granting campuses in Abu Dhabi and Shanghai. NYU Abu Dhabi has produced more Rhodes Scholars per student than any other university in the world. "}
{"id": "5896", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5896", "title": "Bee", "text": "Bees are flying insects of the Hymenoptera, which also includes ants, wasps and sawflies. There are about 20,000 species of bees. Bees collect pollen from flowers. Bees can be found on all continents except Antarctica.\nBees fall into four groups:\nThe European honey bee (called \"Apis mellifera\" by biologists), is kept by humans for honey. Keeping bees to make honey is called beekeeping, or apiculture.\nEvolution.\nFlowers were pollinated by insects such as beetles long before bees first appeared. Bees are different because they are \"specialized\" as pollination agents. Their body and behavior make pollination easier. Bees are generally better at the task than other pollinating insects such as beetles, flies, butterflies and pollen wasps. The appearance of such floral specialists is believed to have driven the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, the bees themselves.\nBees, like ants, evolved from wasps. The ancestors of bees were wasps in a family which preyed on other insects. The switch from insect prey to pollen may have come from the capture of prey insects that were covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae. Similar behaviour could be switched to pollen collection. This same evolutionary scenario has occurred within the vespoid wasps, where the group known as \"pollen wasps\" also evolved from predatory ancestors. \nA recently reported bee fossil, of the genus \"Melittosphex\", is considered \"an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea, sister-group to the modern bees\", and dates from the Lower Cretaceous (~100 mya). Features of its morphology place it clearly within the bees. It still has two ancestral traits of the legs which betray its origin. The issue is still under debate, and the phylogenetic relationships among bee families are poorly understood.\nBee bodies.\nLike other insects, the body of a bee can be divided into three parts: the head, thorax (the middle part), and abdomen (the back part). Also like other insects, bees have three pairs of legs and two pairs of wings. Many bees are hairy and have yellow and black or orange and black warning colors.\nMany bees have stings (like a hollow needle) on the rear of their bodies. If they get confused, angry, or scared they may sting, and inject venom, which hurts. Once a worker bee has stung it dies after a short while, but other types of bee and wasp can sting again. Some people are allergic to bee stings and may even die from them.\nSocial bees.\nSome bees are eusocial insects; this means they live in organized groups called colonies. Honey bees, the kind of bee used in beekeeping, are eusocial. The home of a bee colony is called a hive. One hive has only one queen. \nThere are three kinds of bees in a honey bee colony. A queen bee is the most important bee in the colony because she will lay the eggs. The queen bee only uses her stinger to sting other queen bees. The queen is usually the mother of the worker bees. She ate a special jelly called royal jelly from when she was young. Worker bees are females too, and they are the bees that collect pollen from flowers and will fight to protect the colony. Workers do a waggle dance to tell the others where they have found nectar; Karl von Frisch discovered this.\nDrone bees (males) mate with the queen bee so that she can lay eggs. The only function of the male drone is to mate. They do no other work in the hive.\nHaplodiploidy.\nIn haplodiploid species, females develop from fertilized eggs and males from unfertilized eggs. \nBecause a male has only one copy of each gene, his daughters (which are diploid, with two copies of each gene) share 100% of his genes and 50% of their mother's. Therefore, they share 75% of their genes with each other.\nIt is unclear whether this system is necessary for eusociality.\nMonogamy (queens mating singly) is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far known, so it is likely that haplodiploidy contributed to the evolution of eusociality in bees."}
{"id": "5897", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5897", "title": "Dragonfly", "text": "Dragonflies are flying insects of the order Odonata. There are about 5,300 species of dragonfly. The adults eat other flying insects.\nDragonflies have large compound eyes, which is their main sense organ. They have four strong transparent wings, and a long body.\nDragonflies are usually found around lakes, ponds, streams and wetlands. They are predators which eat mosquitoes, and other small insects such as flies, bees, ants, and butterflies. Their larvae, known as 'nymphs', are aquatic. They are also carnivorous.\nBecause their legs are adapted to grab prey in the air, they are not adapted for moving on land. Once they perch, they rarely use their legs for walking. \nDragonflies have been around for 300 million years. In the rain forests of the Carboniferous and Permian periods, some species had wingspans of over . Oxygen levels were quite high at that time.\nDragonflies and damselflies.\nDragonflies are in one suborder of the Odonata, and their relatives, the damselflies, are in another suborder. Some people mistake the damselfly for the dragonfly, because they look similar.\nAdult damselflies have thinner, more delicate bodies than those of dragonflies. This you can see even when they are flying. When at rest, most damselflies hold their wings together above the body. Most dragonflies hold their wings horizontally. The eyes of dragonflies are larger, and touch each other. The eyes of damselflies are separated. Many damselflies live in groups close to a river. Taken together, these points are usually enough to distinguish the two groups.\nReproduction.\nFemale dragonflies lay eggs in or near water, often on plants. When laying eggs, some species go under the water to lay their eggs on a good surface. The eggs then hatch into nymphs. While in the nymph stage they eat mosquito larvae and other things.\nMost of a dragonfly's life is spent in the nymph form, beneath the water's surface. It is quite active. It can extend its jaws in front of its mouth to catch prey. Tiny vertebrates such as tadpoles and fish are part of its diet. Some nymphs even hunt on land. They draw water in and out of their rectum. They can move fast by squirting water out of the anus. They also have gills in their rectum.\nLarvae.\nThe larval stage of large dragonflies may last as long as five years. In smaller species, this stage may last between two months and three years. When the larva is ready to metamorphose into an adult, it climbs up a reed or other emergent plant. Exposure to air causes the larva to begin breathing. The skin splits at a weak spot behind the head and the adult dragonfly crawls out of its old larval skin, pumps up its wings, and flies off to feed on midges and flies. The adult stage of larger species of dragonfly can last as long as five or six months.\nDragonflies experience incomplete metamorphosis: the nymphs (called naiads) swim and live underwater, like fish. The female dragonfly lays her fertilized eggs near or right in the water. The naiads \u2013 which do not look much like dragonflies at all \u2013 hatch and immediately take to the water. \nWhile living in the water, the naiads eat as many aquatic insects as possible, as well as other small creatures like tadpoles and minnows. Hidden among the plants, a naiad will lie in wait for prey to swim by. It can then squeeze water out of the rear of its abdomen like a jet stream. This moves the naiad forward very quickly, allowing it to snatch its prey with its powerful jaws. Some naiads even have a long lower jaw that can shoot out and grab prey.\nNaiads live in the water for weeks (or even years in some species) and undergo a series of moults to grow. When a naiad is ready for its final moult, it finds a stick or other object sticking out of the water. It use this to crawl out of the water, and wait for its exoskeleton to dry. As the exoskeleton cracks open at the seam, the adult dragonfly crawls out.\nAdults.\nEyesight.\nDragonflies have tremendous eyesight. Their compound eyes are very large and have up to 50,000 individual lenses. Their eyes wrap around the top of the head. As a result, they have a wide field of vision: they can see almost everywhere at once. Sight is by far their most important sense, used to catch flies and avoid birds.\nFlight.\nIn flight the adult dragonfly can move in six directions; upward, downward, forward, back, and side to side. They can also hover quite well in midair, and then they can take off at speeds of up to . Scientists discovered dragonflies can move each of their four wings independently which gives them their flying abilities. Dragonflies bend and twist their wings to cause little whirlwinds that move the air even faster over the upper part of the airfoil, reducing air pressure even more than most flying animals can. This gives them a lot of lift, even in the face of powerful winds.\nThe flight style of different families of dragonfly is one of their distinguishing features. It gives rise to some terms which are widely used by dragonfly observers:\nHawkers (family Aeshnidae). They are among the largest and fastest flying dragonflies. The adults live mostly in the air, and even mate in flight. They have large and powerful wings, and can fly forwards or backwards or hover like a helicopter. The wings are always extended horizontally.\nSkimmers or perchers are the very large family Libellulidae. There are several flight styles amongst its genera. The genus \"Sympetrum\" lives in the northern hemisphere and has 50 species. It breeds in ponds and searches over meadows. There are at least 100 other genera.\nCruisers (family Macromiidae). They usually fly over bodies of water (and roads) straight down the middle. They have green eyes which just barely meet at the top of the head. Females of this family lack an ovipositor at the end of the abdomen and lay their eggs by dipping the abdomen in the water as they fly over.\nThermoregulation.\nSome dragonflies adjust their resting position to prevent overheating. They may use a handstand-like position to prevent overheating on sunny days. The abdomen is raised until its tip points at the sun, minimizing their surface area exposed to the heat. The position is called the obelisk posture. The species that do this are called 'perchers'; they are \"sit and wait\" predators which spend much of their time keeping still.\nPredation.\nThere are predators which eat dragonflies. The birds known a bee-eaters do regularly take dragonflies. Also, despite their good eyesight, dragonflies apparently cannot see spiders' webs, so they get caught there."}
{"id": "5898", "revid": "1122617", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5898", "title": "Wind", "text": "WIND is the flow of gases. On Earth, wind is mostly the movement of air. In outer space, solar wind is the movement of gases or particles from the sun through space. The strongest winds seen on a planet in our solar system are on Neptune and Saturn.\nShort bursts of fast winds are called \"gusts\". Strong winds that go on for about one minute are called \"squalls\". Winds that go on for a long time are called many different things, such as \"breeze\", \"gale\", \"hurricane\", and \"typhoon\".\nWind can move land, especially in deserts. Cold wind can sometimes have a bad effect on livestock. Wind also affects animals' food stores, their hunting and the way they protect themselves.\nSunlight drives the Earth's atmospheric circulation. The resulting winds blow over land and sea, producing weather. \nA High pressure area (that makes an anticyclone) near a low pressure system (that makes a cyclone), makes air move from the high pressure to the low pressure to try to even out the pressures. The Coriolis effect causes the winds to spiral around. A big difference in pressure can make high winds. In some storms, such as hurricanes, typhoons, cyclones, or tornadoes, it can cause winds faster than 200\u00a0mph (320 kilometres per hour ). This can damage houses and other buildings, and can kill people.\nWind can also be caused by the rising of hot air, or the falling of cool air. When hot air rises, it creates a low pressure underneath it, and air moves in to equalize the pressure. When cold air drops (because it is denser or heavier than warm air), it creates a high pressure, and flows out to even out the pressure with the low pressure around it.\nThe wind is usually invisible, but rain, dust, or snow can show how it is blowing. A weathervane can also show you where the wind is coming from. The Beaufort scale is a way to tell how strong the wind is. It is used at sea, when no land can be seen. \nThe increase in wind causes an increase in the rate of evaporation.\nDamage.\nHigh winds can cause damage depending on how strong they are. Sometimes gusts of wind can make poorly made bridges move or be destroyed, like the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in 1940. Electric power distribution can fail because of wind, even if its speed is as low as . This happens when tree branches damage power lines. No kind of tree can resist hurricane-force winds, but trees with roots that are not very deep can be blown over more easily. Trees such as eucalyptus, sea hibiscus, and avocado are brittle (easy to break) and are damaged more easily.\nTrade winds.\nThe trade winds are the prevailing pattern of easterly surface winds found in the tropics, within the lower portion of the Earth's atmosphere. They occur in the lower section of the troposphere near the Earth's equator. The trade winds blow predominantly from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere. They blow from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere. They are stronger during the winter and when the Arctic oscillation is in its warm phase. Trade winds have been used by captains of sailing ships to cross the world's oceans for centuries. They enabled European empire expansion into the Americas. They also allowed trade routes to become established across the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.\nThe \"doldrums\" are in the equatorial region. It is a wind belt where air is warm, with little pressure variations. Winds are light there. Another name for doldrums is \"Intertropical Convergence Zone\" (ITCZ)\nIn outer space.\nWind in outer space, called \"solar wind\", is very different from a wind on earth. This wind is caused by the sun, or other stars, and it is made up of particles that came out of the star's atmosphere. Like solar wind, the planetary wind is made up of light gases that have come out of planets' atmospheres."}
{"id": "5899", "revid": "1097967", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5899", "title": "Vertebrate", "text": "A vertebrate is an animal with a spinal cord surrounded by cartilage or bone. The word comes from vertebrae, the bones that make up the spine. Animals that are not vertebrates are called invertebrates. Vertebrates include birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals. The parts of the vertebrate skeleton are:\nExamples of vertebrates are mammals, birds, and fish. A few tens of thousands of species have been identified. The term \"fish\" is used to describe at least four different kinds of vertebrates.\nDistinctions.\nVertebrates dominate amongst the animals in virtually all environments. They include the largest animals in each main ecosystem, though not the largest living things (because that would include trees). They are the only animals which have an adaptive immune system. These two facts may be connected."}
{"id": "5900", "revid": "7506017", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5900", "title": "Alpha male", "text": "An alpha male is the top-ranking male in a mammalian social group.\nOrigin.\nSome animals live in a social structure where the most powerful male in the group is decided by either fights or very aggressive battles that sometimes end in death (in the wild). The current alpha male must defend his position from younger members. When he is too old or not strong enough to win, he loses his position in the group. Sometimes, he will die or be forced to leave the group.\nThe result of this is that the alpha male usually has more opportunity to mate with the available females. This system developed because strong males will produce young which have a better chance for survival.\nExamples.\nSome animal groups which may have alpha males:\nHumans.\nAlpha male can also refer to a high-ranked human in a group. This may be in a business setting or sometimes in other competitive areas, like sports. However, this is an extension by metaphor: humans do not have the same mating system as other social mammals. One reason is that the oestrous cycle in humans is different. This has the result that females may be sexually receptive at almost any time. Also, humans generally pair off, and alpha males do not have exclusive rights over all females in a group, except in rare circumstances."}
{"id": "5905", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5905", "title": "Virus (life science)", "text": ""}
{"id": "5906", "revid": "1205", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5906", "title": "Street (town)", "text": ""}
{"id": "5908", "revid": "11252", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5908", "title": "Computer game", "text": ""}
{"id": "5909", "revid": "7886215", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5909", "title": "Singapore", "text": "Singapore, officially the Republic of Singapore, is a sovereign country as well as a city-state. It is at the southern end of the Malay Peninsula in Asia, between the Straits of Malacca and the South China Sea. Singapore is about one degree of latitude () north of the equator. About 5.70 million people live in Singapore. About 3.31 million are citizens. Most of them are ethnically Chinese, Malay, or Indian, as well as a smaller number of other Asians.\nPresent-day Singapore was founded in 1819 by Stamford Raffles as a trading post of the British Empire. During the Second World War, Singapore was taken over by Japan in 1942, but returned to British control after Japan surrendered in 1945. Singapore started to govern itself in 1959, and in 1963 became part of the new federation of Malaysia, together with Malaya, North Borneo, and Sarawak. Political and social differences led to Singapore being removed from the federation two years later, becoming an independent country on its own.\nThe symbolic national language of Singapore is Malay. Other official languages of Singapore are English, Mandarin and Tamil. English is the language of choice because it is the language that everyone in Singapore knows and uses. It is the first language taught in schools and the language used by the government and in court. Students are also usually taught the language of their ethnicity. This means that the Chinese will learn Mandarin, Malays will learn Malay, and so on. Students can also choose to learn a third language in secondary school. As a result, most Singaporeans are bilingual.\nSingapore is also known as a \"Garden City\" or a \"City in a Garden\". It is because there are plants everywhere, making it look like a garden. Singapore has one of the highest standards of living in the world, with very good education, healthcare, housing, and very low corruption. It is also known for having many strict rules and punishments, including fines. This is why it is also sometimes jokingly called a \"fine\" city. The government says this has helped Singapore in being a very safe country. Singapore is one of the founding members of ASEAN.\nHistory.\nBefore 1819.\nSingapore's name comes from 'Singa Pura', which means Lion City in Sanskrit. Many people around the world understand \"Lion City\" to refer to Singapore. There is some debate about who founded Singapore. According to the Malay Annals, a Sumatran prince called Sang Nila Utama landed on Temasek (Singapore's old name) and saw a Lion which is called 'Singa' in Malay. Thus he gave the island a new name, 'Singapura'. However, Sang Nila Utama was likely mistaken, as lions never existed in Singapore. It is believed that the \"lion\" was actually a Malayan Tiger, which also exists in neighbouring Malaysia. While now extinct in Singapore it used to be present back then.\nThere were also many pieces of old items, such as Chinese coins, that showed that Temasek was an important Asian trading port even before the British rule.\n1819 to 1942.\nFew people lived in Singapore at the beginning of the 19th century. British governor Stamford Raffles arrived in Singapore on 28 January 1819 and wanted to set up a British trading town. At the time, the island was then ruled by Tengku Abdul Rahman, the Sultan of Johor, who the Dutch and the Bugis from Sulawesi had controlled. However, the Sultanate was weakened by infighting: the Temenggong (Chief Minister) of Tengku Abdul Rahman, as well as his officials, supported the Sultan's elder brother Tengku Long, who was living in exile in Riau. \nWith the Temenggong's help, Raffles managed to secretly bring Tengku Long back into Singapore. Raffles offered to recognize Tengku Long as the true Sultan of Johor, under the title of Sultan Hussein, as well as giving him $5000 per year and another $3000 to the Temenggong; in return, Sultan Hussein would give the British the right to establish a trading post on Singapore. An official treaty was signed on 6 February 1819.\nIn 1824, another treaty with the Sultan led to the entire island becoming under the British. In 1826, Singapore became part of the Straits Settlements. Singapore became the regional capital in 1836. Before Raffles arrived, there were only about a thousand people living on the island, mostly Malays along with a handful of Chinese. By 1860, the population had grown to over 80,000, more than half being Chinese. The country was given colony status in 1867. Later, in the 1890s, when the rubber industry became established in Malaya and Singapore, the island became a global center for sorting rubber and exporting them.\nWorld War I.\nSingapore was not really affected by the First World War (1914\u201318), as the conflict did not spread to Southeast Asia. The only significant event during the war was the 1915 Singapore Mutiny by Muslim soldiers from British India, who were garrisoned in Singapore. After hearing news that they were to be sent to fight the Ottoman Empire in Europe, a Muslim state, the soldiers killed their officers and several British civilians before the mutiny was stopped by non-Muslim troops arriving from Johore and Burma.\nInterwar period.\nAfter World War I, the British built the large Singapore Naval Base as part of the defensive Singapore strategy. First announced in 1921, the construction of the base went at a slow pace until the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931. Costing $60 million and not fully completed in 1938, it was the largest dry dock in the world, the third-largest floating dock, and had enough fuel tanks to support the entire British navy for six months. The base was defended by heavy naval guns stationed at Fort Siloso, Fort Canning and Labrador Park, as well as a Royal Air Force airfield at Tengah Air Base. Winston Churchill called Singapore the \"Gibraltar of the East\", and military discussions often referred to the base as just \"East of Suez\".\nHowever, the main fleet was in Europe, and the British did not have enough money to build a second fleet to protect their Asian colonies. The plan was for the Home Fleet to sail quickly to Singapore in the event of an emergency. As a result, after World War II broke out in 1939, the fleet was busy defending Britain from Germany, leaving Singapore open for a Japanese invasion.\nWorld War II.\nDue to the weak defenses of the country, the Japanese attacked Singapore and easily took control of the colony on 15 February 1942. Up to 60,000 British soldiers surrendered on that day, and Churchill called it \"the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history\". There were a lot of losses by both the British and the rest of the Empire, with a total of nearly 85,000 people captured. About 5,000 were killed or injured, many from Australia and India.\nPeople of Singapore went through hard times during the Japanese rule, until the surrender of the Japanese in September of 1945. Many people were tortured or killed by the Japanese as they did not follow the rules properly or because they were suspected of going against the Japanese. The Japanese also targeted the Chinese the most; between 5,000 and 25,000 Chinese were killed, now known as the Sook Ching massacre. The most notable anti-Japanese force was Force 136, headed by Lim Bo Seng. Its purpose was to encourage and supply resistance movements in the enemy-occupied territory and occasionally mount sabotage operations.\nThe hard times during World War II made the people think that the British were not as strong as before. Therefore, many people were supportive of independence once the British had returned.\nIndependence.\nA few years after the war, In 1963, Singapore joined with Malaya, Sabah and Sarawak to form the new nation of Malaysia. Malaysia is a country with many races. In Malaya, only the Malays have special benefits. For example, the Malays could get university education more easily than other races.\nAs most people in Singapore are Chinese, Singapore wanted equality for all the people of Malaysia. Singapore also wanted a common market to be set up so that goods to Malaysia would not be taxed. However, this was not done and caused arguments between the state government of Singapore and the federal government of Malaysia.\nSingapore separated from Malaysia and became independent on its own on 9 August 1965.\nAfter Independence.\nAfter Independence, the president of Singapore was Yusof Ishak and its prime minister was Lee Kuan Yew.\nAt first, many people thought Singapore's independence would not last. In 1967, Singapore helped to start the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and in 1970 it joined the Non-Aligned Movement. Lee Kuan Yew was in charge of the country as Prime Minister of Singapore and saw it become very developed.\nIn 1990, Goh Chok Tong replaced Lee Kuan Yew as prime minister, while Lee Kuan Yew became Senior Minister. When Goh Chok Tong was Prime Minister, Singapore went through the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the 2003 SARS outbreak and terrorist threats by Jemaah Islamiyah. In 2004, Lee Hsien Loong, the son of Lee Kuan Yew, took over as Prime Minister. Goh Chok Tong became the Senior Minister, and Lee Kuan Yew became the Minister Mentor of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew died in 2015.\nGovernment and politics.\nSingapore is a parliamentary republic with a Westminster system of unicameral parliamentary government representing constituencies. Its constitution states representative democracy as its political system. Singapore is ranked regularly as one of the least corrupt countries in the world, according to Transparency International.\nThe Cabinet has executive power, and is led by the Prime Minister, and the President. The president is elected through popular vote, and has some veto powers for a few big decisions such as the use of the national reserves and the appointment of judges, but otherwise occupies a post with little power.\nThe Parliament serves as the legislative branch of government. Members of Parliament (MPs) are made up of elected, non-constituency and nominated members. Elected MPs are voted into parliament on a \"first-past-the-post\" (plurality) system and represent either single-member or group-representation constituencies. Elections are free, and the People's Action Party has won control of Parliament with large majorities in every election since self-governance in 1959. In the most recent parliamentary elections in 2020, the largest opposition, led by the Workers' Party, increased its representation in the House to 10 elected MPs out of 93.\nThe legal system of Singapore is based on English common law, however with large and important local differences. Trial by jury was removed in 1970 leaving judicial judgement done completely and only by judgeship. Singapore has laws that include corporal punishment in the form of caning for rape, rioting, vandalism, and some immigration crimes. There is a mandatory death penalty for murder, and for certain drug-trafficking and firearms offences. In a 2008 survey, international business executives believed Singapore had the best judicial system in Asia.\nPeople.\nReligion.\nBuddhism is the most common religion in Singapore. Other common religions include: Christianity, Islam, Taoism, and Hinduism.\nEducation.\nStudents in Singapore go through six years of compulsory primary school, which ends with all students taking a Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE). Then, depending on their results in the PSLE, students are streamed into \"Special\", \"Express\", \"Normal (Academic)\", and \"Normal (Technical)\" groups. The amount of time a student spends studying in Secondary school (4\u20135 years) depends on their group.\nStudents are taught in English and their mother tongue, which can be Chinese, Malay or Tamil. Secondary school students may also choose to study a third language such as:\nStudents can take a third language as it increases their chances in getting an overseas scholarship and can improve their examination grades, especially in the GCE Ordinary Level (\"O\" Levels), which are Secondary students take after their five or four years of education. However, only some students can qualify to take a third language.\nAfter their \"O\" Levels, students can choose to go to a polytechnic, which is a place where students can study for 3 years for a diploma or to a junior college where students study for 2 years to receive an \"A\" Level. Students can also go to Institutes of Technical Education (ITE), where students study for two years to receive a \"National ITE Certificate\" (NITEC). This certificate is only recognized in Singapore. Students who go to ITE usually continue their education at a polytechnic.\nWith either a diploma, or an \"A\" Level certificate, students can apply to go to universities in Singapore or overseas.\nLanguages.\nThe Singapore government has chosen four official languages: English, Malay, Chinese (Mandarin), and Tamil. English is the primary language. Singapore English is the main language in Singapore.\nEnglish is the first language of the nation, but it is not the most common. English is the second most commonly spoken language among Singaporeans. The most commonly spoken language amongst Singaporeans in their homes is Chinese (51%), followed by English (32%), Malay (13%) and Tamil (7%). This means that 32% of Singaporeans are native English speakers. Most of the rest of the people speak it as a second language. However, English has the largest total number of speakers including native and second language speakers. Mandarin Chinese is the second most common.\nAlmost 40% of people in Singapore are foreign. Most foreigners come from Asia. The country where most foreigners come from are Malaysia, its closest neighbor. In 2009, there may have been 350,000 Malaysians working in Singapore. Many Chinese-speaking foreigners and Chinese-speaking Singaporeans work in services. Thus, Chinese is the main language of many workers such as hawkers, retail assistants, hairdressers, etc. in Singapore today.\nSingaporean English mainly comes from British English. The forms of English spoken in Singapore range from Standard English to a pidgin called Singlish. The Singapore government and many Singaporeans are against using Singlish. There is a \"Speak Good English\" campaign each year. Public schools and in the media also have rules against Singlish. There are many Singapore accents in English because of the many languages and identities of people in the city. Languages can even change over the generations and children may speak different languages and have different accents from their mother. For example, in a Singaporean Chinese family, the grandmother might speak Hokkien as her first language. Differently, the mother might speak Mandarin as her first language and Hokkien/English as her second languages, while the grandson might speak English as his first language and Mandarin as his second language.\nBefore independence in 1965, Hokkien, a Chinese dialect, was the common language among the Chinese laborers. Malay and English were used to communicate between the different ethnic groups. After independence in 1965, English became the first language of the nation and replaced Hokkien and Malay as the one shared language. Today, most younger Singaporeans have English as their first language or are fluent in English.\nMalay is a national language of Singapore because of the history of the city. However, less than 20% of Singaporeans can read and write in Malay. Malay is still used at home by most Malay Singaporeans. The Malay used in Singapore (Bahasa Melayu) is closer to the language in Malaysia than the language in Indonesia. However, there are differences between the Malay in Singapore and in Malaysia. The national anthem \"Majulah Singapura\" is sung in Malay.\nMany people speak Chinese \u2013 Mandarin and other Chinese dialects \u2013 in Singapore. Just over 50% of Singaporeans speak it at home, so it is the most common language in homes. Singaporean Mandarin is based on simplified Chinese and it is similar to the system used in mainland China. The forms of Mandarin spoken in Singapore range from Standard Mandarin to a pidgin known as Singdarin. Besides Mandarin, many southern Chinese dialects are also spoken in Singapore.\nHokkien used to be a lingua franca among the Singaporean Chinese so many older Singaporeans still understand Hokkien. The most common Chinese dialects spoken by Singaporeans are the Hokkien, Hainan, Teochew and Cantonese. However, Chinese dialects other than Mandarin are not allowed in the media, so these dialects are quickly dying out. Most younger Singaporeans do not speak them anymore.\nTamil, a South Indian language, is spoken by about half of Indians in Singapore. That is about 5% of all Singaporeans. However, North Indian languages such as Hindi and Punjabi are also spoken by a small group of Singaporean Indians in Singapore.\nCulture.\nSingapore has many kinds of people and immigrants from many places. Therefore, Singaporean culture has often been described as a mix of cultures \u2013 European, Malay, Chinese, Indian and Peranakan. Also, foreigners are 42% of the population in Singapore and they are part of changing Singaporean culture.\nFood.\nDining is an important part of life in Singapore. Singaporean food is an example of the many different cultures in the country. It is also an example of mixing among cultures. British, Chinese, Indian, Malay, Tamil, and Indonesian styles of cooking all mix together. It is especially known for its sea food. Typical Singaporean food includes: Satay, Nasi lemak, Chilli crab, Kaya toast, and Hainanese chicken rice, Laksa, Fish Head Curry, Hokkien Prawn Meeand Char Kway Teow.\nMedia.\nMediaCorp, the state-owned media corporation, operates all seven local broadcast television channels in Singapore. It also runs 13 radio stations of the total 18 radio stations in Singapore. Radio and television stations are all owned by government controlled companies. However, one radio transmitter in Singapore is not controlled by the government. That is the Far Eastern Relay Station of the BBC World Service.\nPrint media of Singapore includes 16 newspapers and several magazines. Daily newspapers are published in English, Chinese, Malay, and Tamil.\nNational flower.\nThe national flower of Singapore is Vanda Miss Joaquim. It is a type of orchid and it is a hybrid orchid. This makes Singapore the only nation in the world to have a hybrid as a national flower. It was chosen because it was part of the effort to create national pride and identity.\nEconomy.\nSingapore has a strong and free economy that supports a large middle class. The city state is a global shipping and logistics hub and many multinational firms have their offices in Singapore. The national airline, Singapore Airlines, has a large global network which brings tourists and business travelers alike, to the city. The airline has often been ranked as the world's best airline.\nSingapore also has a port located at the south of Singapore, called Keppel Harbour. It is one of the busiest ports around the world with many ships coming in to trade in a single day. Singapore also has another port on Jurong Island.\nMoney.\nSingapore's currency is the Singapore dollar. The short name for the Singapore dollar is SGD. Brunei dollar can be used in Singapore, because they have the same value.\nGeography.\nSingapore is made up of 63 islands, including the main island, which is known as Singapore Island to most people, but is also known as Pulau Ujong. There are two man-made connections to Johor, Malaysia: the Johor\u2013Singapore Causeway in the north, and the Tuas Second Link in the west. Jurong Island, Pulau Tekong, Pulau Ubin and Sentosa are the largest of Singapore's smaller islands. The highest natural point is Bukit Timah Hill at .\nAbout 23% of Singapore's land area are forest and nature reserves. Urbanisation has removed most primary rainforest, with Bukit Timah Nature Reserve the only significant remaining forest. Even though there is very little primary rainforest left, there are more than 300 parks and four nature reserves in Singapore. There are also many trees planted all over Singapore and almost fifty per cent of the country is covered by trees and plants. Because of this, Singapore is also commonly known as the 'Garden City'.\nSingapore, being a small country, has been reclaiming land from the sea around the island. The first time Singapore started to reclaim land was in the 1960s. The total land area of Singapore at that time was 581.5\u00a0km2 and it has increased to 730\u00a0km2 in the 2010s, which is an increase of about 20% in total land area. It may grow by another by 2030. Some land reclamation projects involve joining together smaller islands to make larger islands with more uses, like Jurong Island. Singapore uses the landfill method to reclaim the sea at the south of the country, but polders have been recently used too. The country's rapid reclamation projects has made disputes with its neighbouring countries, Malaysia and Indonesia.\nClimate.\nSingapore is hot and wet all year round. It has a tropical rainforest climate (\"Af\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), which means there are no seasons (spring, summer, autumn and winter) in Singapore. There is the most rain at the end of the year, and the temperature is usually around 20\u00a0\u00b0C to 35\u00a0\u00b0C.\nAlthough Singapore does not experience the four seasons, the period from May to June is usually warmer, while the period from November to January is cooler because of the more frequent rains and monsoonal winds in Singapore during the year-end.\nRelations with other countries.\nSingapore has diplomatic relations with 175 other Sovereign states. Singapore's foreign policy is to maintain a secure environment in Southeast Asia as well as the countries near Southeast Asia. A basic rule is the political and economic stability in Southeast Asia.\nASEAN.\nSingapore is part of the ASEAN (Association of the South East Asian nations) network, which is an organisation that unites all Southeast Asian countries. Member countries of ASEAN work with and help other countries in ASEAN. Singapore is one of the countries that founded ASEAN, and is the most developed country among them all.\nCommonwealth of Nations.\nSingapore is also part of the Commonwealth of Nations, which is for countries that used to be under the British's rule.\nHolidays.\nPublic holidays in Singapore:\nThere are also school holidays, lasting one week in March and September, about one month in June, and about one and a half months in December.\nRecords.\nEven though it is a small country, Singapore holds many world records with its buildings and people. Some are:\nTransportation.\nSingapore has one of the best infrastructure qualities in the world. Buses, trains, and taxis are easily found.\nMost of Singapore are well-connected by a railway system known as the Mass Rapid Transit, or MRT in short. There are also taxi companies like Comfort Cabs, Silver Cab, SMRT Taxis, CityCab and Premier Taxi. There is one telephone number to call a taxi, of which the closest taxi from any company will respond. Apps such as Grab and Gojek as an alternative to taxi companies are also available.\nThe Mass Rapid Transit of Singapore is the most commonly used form of transportation in Singapore.\nThe Singaporean land transport system is controlled by the LTA (Land Transport Authority) of Singapore.\nAirport.\nThe Singapore Changi Airport is the main airport of Singapore. It is in the east of Singapore, with a total of four terminals with airlines flying to many different parts of the world. It has also received many awards for being the best airport in the world. A Skytrain service is also available at the airport.\nThe airport is in Changi. It is on a 13 square kilometres (5.0 sq mi) site which was reclaimed from the sea."}
{"id": "5911", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5911", "title": "List of Historians", "text": ""}
{"id": "5915", "revid": "7745903", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5915", "title": "Johannesburg", "text": "Johannesburg is the largest city in South Africa. It is the capital of the Gauteng Province. It was founded on October 4, 1886 and has the JSE Securities Exchange, which is the largest stock exchange in Africa.\nJohannesburg houses the tallest office block in Africa, the Carlton Centre (50 stories) and the tallest tower, the Hillbrow Tower (270 metres, or 90 stories). The city is nicknamed Egoli or Jozi, which means \"place of gold\", for the large gold deposit at Witwatersrand. \n The Johannesburg Zoo was established in 1904, and historically, it has been owned and run by the city of Johannesburg. It houses the only two polar bears in Africa. Johannesburg is not seen as a tourist centre in South Africa, but rather as a commercial centre.\nJohannesburg has a subtropical highland climate (Cwb in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification). Snow is a very rare event. It only snows in Johannesburg once or twice in a century.\nNelson Mandela died there on 5 December 2013, aged 95. He was also given the \"Freedom of the City\" award. "}
{"id": "5916", "revid": "268071", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5916", "title": "Johannesburg Zoo", "text": ""}
{"id": "5935", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5935", "title": "Breakfast", "text": "Breakfast is the first meal of the day. It is usually eaten in the morning. The word comes from two other words; \"break\" (\"end\") and fast (\"not eating for a long time\").\nDefinition: [1463] from break (v.) + fast (n.). Cf. Fr. d\u00e9jeuner \"to breakfast,\" from L. dis-jejunare \"to break the fast.\"\nPeople around the world eat different things for breakfast:"}
{"id": "5936", "revid": "7667396", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5936", "title": "Fast", "text": "Fast can mean different things:"}
{"id": "5937", "revid": "7782815", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5937", "title": "Town", "text": "A town is usually a place with a lot of houses, but not a city. As with cities, there is more than one way to say what a town is in different countries. In some places, it is a kind of local government. When they say \"town\" people are normally thinking of a big, important place. It may even be a city.\nGenerally, a town is smaller than a city and larger than a village, but that is not always the case, and the definition can differ in each country.\nGenerally, the difference between towns and villages or hamlets is the sort of economy they have. People in towns usually get money from industry (factories etc.), commerce (shops etc.) and public service (working for the town), not agriculture (growing food).\nThe number of people who live in a place does not tell us if it is a town or a village. In many areas of the world, like India, a big village can have many more people than a small town. It is also difficult to say if a place is a town because today, some towns are becoming bigger.\nSometimes a place is a city because it got the name \"city\" by law. However, people often call a place a \"town\" if it is small.\nIn the Middle Ages, a place became a town by means of a charter, which gave it town privileges.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States of America, the meaning of the term \"town\" is different in each state. In some states, a town is a town if the state says it is. In other states, like Wisconsin, a town is a subdivision of a county. In other states, like Michigan, the name \"town\" has no official meaning. People use it to describe any place where many people live.\nIn the six New England states, a town is a smaller part of the county. In all six, towns do things that, in most other states, the counties do. In many of these towns, town meetings are the main form of government, so citizens can say what happens where they live by direct democracy. In these states, the towns are really more important than the county. In Connecticut and Rhode Island, counties are only on the map and have no power. In the other four states, courts are the main work of counties. The counties with other functions are mostly in New Hampshire and Vermont.\nAlabama.\nIn Alabama, whether or not a place is a \"town\" or a \"city\" is based on how many people live there. A place with 2,000 people or more is a city. A place with less than 2,000 people is a town (Code of Alabama 1975, Section 11-40-6). For legislative purposes, places are put into eight categories based on the number of people. Class 8 includes all towns, and it includes all cities with that have less than 6,000 people (Code of Alabama 1975, Section 11-40-12).\nKansas.\nAll incorporated places in Kansas are called cities. Once a city is incorporated in Kansas, it will continue to be a city no matter what. There are three categories for cities:\nLouisiana.\nIn Louisiana, a \"town\" is a place that has a city government, and it has 1,0014,999 people living there.\nNew York.\nIn New York, a town is also a smaller part of the county, but it is less important than in New England. Towns provide almost all municipal services to places, called \"hamlets\", that are not in villages, and some services to places that are in \"villages\". In New York, a town usually has some hamlets and villages. But, because villages have power without towns (they are \"independent\") they can be in two towns or even two counties. Everyone in New York State who does not live in an Indian reservation (a special place for American Indians) or a city lives in a town, and perhaps in one of the town's hamlets or villages. A city may be part of a county, but even if it is surrounded by a town that has more people than the city, it is not part of the town.\nUtah.\nIn Utah, the terms \"town\" and \"city\" is based on the number of people living there. A place with 1,000 or more people is a city. A place with fewer than 1,000 people is a town. Cities are divided into five different categories based on the number of people.\nVirginia.\nIn Virginia, a town is similar to a city, but it can have a smaller number of people in it. By Virginia law cities are independent of counties (they have power without counties), towns are part of a county.\nWyoming.\nWyoming law says towns are incorporated places that have less than 4,000 people living there. Places with 4,000 or more people are \"first-class cities\".\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales, the name \"city\" is only for places that have a Royal Charter (a special document) saying they can have that name.\nIn the past, cities usually had a cathedral. Some English people think that a place with a cathedral must be a city, but it is not true today. For example, Northampton, Blackburn and Middlesbrough (where is the cathedral??) are all towns with a cathedral.\nIn the past, a place was usually a town, not a village, when it had a regular market or fair (a market, but not so often). There are some English villages (for example Ipswich, Oxfordshire) larger than some small towns (e.g. Middleham, North Yorkshire).\nJapan.\nIn Japan, The population of a town (\u753a) is less than 50,000 people."}
{"id": "5938", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5938", "title": "Condensed matter physics", "text": "Condensed matter physics is a branch of physics which talks about matter that has its molecules packed together very closely. This usually means it deals with solids (solid matter)."}
{"id": "5939", "revid": "7879370", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5939", "title": "Bag", "text": "A bag is a kind of soft container. It can hold or carry things. It may be made from cloth, leather, plastic, or paper. Many bags are disposable but some are made to use for a long time. A bag may have one or two handles or a shoulder strap. Bags come in different shapes and sizes depending on how they will be used. A small bag that can be carried with a single hand is sometimes called a handbag, purse, or pocketbook. Children can suffocate, or stop breathing and die, when they put certain kinds of bags over their heads, due to having the supply of oxygen cut off."}
{"id": "5940", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5940", "title": "Julius Caesar", "text": "Gaius Julius Caesar (July 100 BC \u2013 15 March 44 BC) was a military commander, politician and author at the end of the Roman Republic.\nCaesar became a member of the First Triumvirate, and when that broke up, he fought a civil war against Pompey the Great. Winning the war, Caesar became Roman dictator for life. He was killed by his enemies in Rome.\nLater rulers of Rome called themselves \u201cCaesar\u201d and this title also became \u201cKaiser\u201d and \u201cTsar\u201d.\nEarly life.\nJulius Caesar was born in Italy around July 100 BC. The exact date is not known. \nAt sixteen he was the head of his family, and came under threat when Lucius Cornelius Sulla became Roman dictator.\nSulla set about purging Rome of his enemies. Hundreds were killed or exiled, and Caesar was on the list. His mother's family pleaded for his life; Sulla reluctantly gave in and removed Caesar from his inheritance. From then on, lack of money was one of the main problems in his life. Caesar joined the army and left Rome. \nOn the way across the Aegean Sea, Caesar was kidnapped by pirates and held prisoner. When the pirates thought to demand a ransom of twenty talents of silver, he insisted they ask for fifty.p39 After the ransom was paid, Caesar raised a fleet, pursued and captured the pirates, and imprisoned them. He had them crucified on his own authority, as he had promised while in captivity\u2014a promise the pirates had taken as a joke. As a sign of leniency, he first had their throats cut. He was soon called back into military action.\nOn the way up.\nOn his return to Rome, he was elected as military tribune, a first step in a political career. He was elected quaestor for 69 BC. His wife Cornelia died that year. After her funeral, Caesar went to serve his quaestorship in Spain.p100 On his return in 67 BC, he married Pompeia (a granddaughter of Sulla), whom he later divorced. In 63 BC he ran for election to the post of Pontifex Maximus, as high priest of the Roman state religion. He ran against two powerful senators; there were accusations of bribery by all sides. Caesar won comfortably, despite his opponents' greater experience and standing.\nAfter his praetorship, Caesar was appointed to govern Roman Spain, but he was still in considerable debt and needed to pay his creditors. He turned to Marcus Licinius Crassus, one of Rome's richest men. In return for political support, Crassus paid some of Caesar's debts and acted as guarantor for others. Caesar left for his province before his praetorship had ended. In Spain he conquered two local tribes, was hailed as \"imperator\" by his troops, and completed his governorship in high esteem. Though he was due a 'triumph' in Rome, he also wanted to stand for Consul, the most senior magistracy in the Republic. Faced with the choice between a triumph and the consulship, Caesar chose the consulship. After election, he was a consul in 59 BC.\nThe First Triumvirate.\nCaesar took power with Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) and Marcus Licinius Crassus. These three men ruled Rome and were called the \"Triumvirate\".\nCaesar was the go-between for Crassus and Pompey. They had been at odds for years, but Caesar tried to reconcile them. Between the three of them, they had enough money and political influence to control public business. This informal alliance, known as the First Triumvirate (rule of three men), was cemented by the marriage of Pompey to Caesar's daughter Julia. Caesar also married again, this time to Calpurnia, who was the daughter of another powerful senator.\nCaesar proposed a law for the redistribution of public lands to the poor, a proposal supported by Pompey, by force of arms if need be, and by Crassus, making the triumvirate public. Pompey filled the city with soldiers, and the triumvirate's opponents were frightened.\nCaesar's Gallic War.\nWith the agreement of his partners, Caesar became the governor of Gallia (Gaul). Gaul is the area which is today's Northern Italy, Switzerland, and France.\nCaesar was the commander of the Roman legions during the Gallic War. The war was fought on the side of Rome's Gallic clients against the Germans, who wanted to invade Gaul. It was also to extend Rome's control of Gaul. Caesar's conquest of Gaul extended Rome's territory to the North Sea. In 55 BC he conducted the first Roman invasion of Britain. Caesar wrote about this eight-year war in his book \"De Bello Gallico\" ('About the Gallic Wars'). This book, written in Latin, is an important historical account.\nThese achievements got him great military power, and threatened to eclipse Pompey. The balance of power was further upset by the death of Crassus in 53 BC.\nCaesar's civil war.\nIn 50 BC, the Senate, led by Pompey, ordered Caesar to disband his army and return to Rome because his term as governor had finished. Caesar thought he would be prosecuted if he entered Rome without the immunity enjoyed by a magistrate. Pompey accused Caesar of insubordination and treason.\nCrossing the Rubicon.\nCaesar and his army approached Rome and \"crossed the Rubicon\", a shallow river in north-east Italy, in 49 BC. It was the point beyond which no army was supposed to go. The river marked the boundary between Cisalpine Gaul to the north, and Italy proper to the south. Crossing the Rubicon caused a civil war. Pompey, the lawful Consul, and his friends, fled from Rome as Caesar's army approached.\nPompey managed to escape before Caesar could capture him. Caesar decided to head for Spain, while leaving Italy under the control of Mark Antony. Caesar made an astonishing 27-day route-march to Spain, where he defeated Pompey's lieutenants. He then returned east, to challenge Pompey in Greece. There, in July 48 BC, at Dyrrhachium Caesar barely avoided a catastrophic defeat. He then decisively defeated Pompey, at the Battle of Pharsalus later that year.\nDictator at last.\nIn Rome, Caesar was appointed Dictator, with Mark Antony as his Master of the Horse (second in command). Caesar presided over his own election to a second consulship and then, after eleven days, resigned this dictatorship.\nLate in 48 BC, he was appointed dictator again, with a term of one year. Caesar then pursued Pompey to Egypt, where Pompey was soon murdered. Caesar then became involved in an Egyptian civil war between the child pharaoh and his sister, wife, and co-regent queen, Cleopatra. Perhaps as a result of the pharaoh's role in Pompey's murder, Caesar sided with Cleopatra. He is reported to have wept at the sight of Pompey's head, which was offered to him by the pharaoh as a gift. In any event, Caesar defeated the pharaoh's forces in 47 BC and installed Cleopatra as ruler.\nCaesar and Cleopatra celebrated their victory with a triumphant procession on the Nile in the spring of 47 B.C. The royal barge was accompanied by 400 additional ships, introducing Caesar to the luxurious lifestyle of the Egyptian pharaohs. Caesar and Cleopatra never married; Roman Law only recognized marriages between two Roman citizens. Caesar continued his relationship with Cleopatra throughout his last marriage, which lasted 14 years \u2013 in Roman eyes, this did not constitute adultery \u2013 and may have fathered a son called Caesarion. Cleopatra visited Rome on more than one occasion, staying in Caesar's villa, outside Rome across the River Tiber.\nIn 46 BC, Caesar defeated Cato and the remnants of Pompey's supporters in Africa. He was then appointed dictator for ten years. In two years he made numerous changes in Roman administration to improve the Republic. Many of these changes were meant to improve the lives of ordinary people. One example, which has lasted, was his reform of the calendar into the present format, with a leap day every four years. In February of 44 BC, one month before his assassination, he was appointed Dictator for life.\nAssassination.\nOn the Ides of March (15 March; see Roman calendar) of 44 BC, Caesar was due to appear at a session of the Senate. Mark Antony, fearing the worst, went to head Caesar off. The plotters expected this, and arranged for someone to intercept him.\nAccording to Eutropius, around sixty or more men participated in the assassination. He was stabbed 23 times. According to Suetonius, a physician later established that only one wound, the second one to his chest, had been lethal.\nThe dictator's last words are not known with certainty, and are a contested subject among scholars and historians alike. The version best known in the English-speaking world is the Latin phrase \"Et tu, Brute?\" ('You too, Brutus?'). In Shakespeare's \"Julius Caesar\", this is the first half of the line: \"\"Et tu, Brute?\" Then fall, Caesar\".\nAccording to Plutarch, after the assassination, Brutus stepped forward as if to say something to his fellow senators; they, however, fled the building. Brutus and his companions then marched to the Capitol while crying out to their beloved city: \"People of Rome, we are once again free!\". They were met with silence, as the citizens of Rome had locked themselves inside their houses as soon as the rumour of what had taken place had begun to spread.\nA wax statue of Caesar was erected in the forum displaying the 23 stab wounds. A crowd who had gathered there started a fire, which badly damaged the forum and the neighbouring buildings. In the ensuing chaos, Mark Antony, Octavian (later Augustus Caesar), and others fought a series of five civil wars, which would end in the formation of the Roman Empire.\nThe Roman empire and its emperors were so important in history that the word \"Caesar\" was used as a title in some European countries to mean emperor, even long after the Roman empire was gone. For example, Germany's emperor was called a \" Kaiser\" up to the year 1919 AD and Russia's emperor was called a Tsar until 1917 AD.\nCaesar as author.\nCaesar was a significant author. \nOther works historically attributed to Caesar, but whose authorship is doubted, are:\nThese narratives were written and published on a yearly basis during or just after the actual campaigns, as a sort of \"dispatches from the front\". Apparently simple and direct in style\u2014to the point that Caesar's \"Commentarii\" are commonly studied by first and second year Latin students\u2014they are in fact quite sophisticated, aimed at the middle-brow readership of minor aristocrats in Rome, Italy, and the provinces.\nEpilepsy.\nBased on remarks by Plutarch, Caesar is sometimes thought to have suffered from epilepsy. Modern scholarship is divided on the subject. It is more certain that he was plagued by malaria, particularly during the Sullan proscriptions of the 80s.\nCaesar had four documented episodes of what may have been complex partial seizures. He may additionally have had \"absence seizures\" (\"petit mal\") in his youth. The earliest accounts of these seizures were made by the biographer Suetonius who was born after Caesar died. The claim of epilepsy is countered among some medical historians by a claim of hypoglycemia. This can cause seizures which are a bit like epilepsy.\nIn 2003, psychiatrist Harbour F. Hodder published what he termed as the \"Caesar Complex\" theory, arguing that Caesar was a sufferer of temporal lobe epilepsy, and that the symptoms were a factor in Caesar's decision to forgo personal safety in the days leading up to his assassination."}
{"id": "5949", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5949", "title": "Sapporo", "text": " is the capital city of Hokkaid\u014d Prefecture in Japan. The port city is on the southwest part of the island of Hokkaid\u014d and it is the island's largest city.\nThe city has a famous snow festival in winter, it has a growing population of about 1,800,000 people. Its area is . There are a lot of fish markets in Sapporo. A beer brand named \"Sapporo\" was named after this city. Ramen is a very popular food in Sapporo. The city has a subway system. Some famous landmarks are the Sapporo TV Tower, and the clock tower that is in the center of the city. There are several universities here, including Hokkaido University. The nearby airport is called New Chitose Airport."}
{"id": "5950", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5950", "title": "Hokkaid\u014d Prefecture", "text": " is a special Japanese prefecture in Hokkaid\u014d region on the island Hokkaid\u014d. It is the most northern prefecture of Japan.\nSapporo is the capital city of Hokkiado.\nHistory.\nUntil the Meiji Restoration, the island was called Ezo, Watari-shima, Yeddo, and Yezo. Since 1869, it has been called Hokkaid\u014d.\nThe population expanded in the late 19th century.\nGeography.\nHokkaid\u014d is the 2nd largest island of Japan The island is between the Sea of Japan to the west, the Sea of Okhotsk to the northeast, the Pacific Ocean to the southeast, and the Tsugaru Strait to the south. \nHokkaid\u014d is separated from Honshu by the Tsugaru Strait; however, it is connected by the underwater Seikan tunnel.\nSome of the Chishima Islands are occupied by Russia, but Japan still considers the islands to be Japanese.\nNational Parks.\nNatural Parks are established in about 10% of the total land area of the prefecture.\nShrines and Temples.\n\"Hokkaid\u014d jing\u016b\" was the chief Shinto shrine (\"ichinomiya\") of Ezo, which was an ancient name for the Hokkaid\u014d region."}
{"id": "5961", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5961", "title": "Hinduism", "text": "Hinduism is not only a religion but also a way of life. Hinduism is known to have more than one god and is widely practiced in South Asia mainly in India and Nepal. Hinduism is the oldest religion in the world, and Hindus refer to it as \"n\", \"the eternal tradition,\" or the \"eternal way,\" beyond human history. Scholars regard Hinduism as a combination of different Indian cultures and traditions, with diverse roots. Hinduism has no founder and origins of Hinduism is unknown.. Hinduism has roots in Indus Valley civilization. There was no concept of religion in India and Hinduism was not a religion. Hinduism as a religion started to develop between 500 BCE and 300 CE, after the Vedic period (1500 BCE to 500 BCE).\nHinduism contains a wide range of philosophies, and is linked by the concepts, like rituals, cosmology, Texts, and pilgrimage to sacred sites. Hindu texts are divided into \u015aruti (\"heard\") and Sm\u1e5bti (\"remembered\"). These texts discuss philosophy, mythology, Vedic yajna, Yoga, agamic rituals, and temple building, and many more. Major scriptures in Hinduism include the Vedas and Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, and the Agamas.\nThere are 4 goals or aims of human life, namely Dharma (duties), Artha (prosperity), Kama (desires/passions), Moksha (liberation/freedom/salvation); karma (action, intent and consequences), Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra (cycle of rebirth), and the various Yogas (paths or practices to attain moksha). Hindu rituals include puja (worship) and recitations, meditation, family-oriented rites of passage, annual festivals, and occasional pilgrimages. Some Hindus leave their social world and become sanyasi to achieve Moksha. Hinduism prescribes the eternal duties, such as honesty, non-violence (ahimsa), patience, self-restraint, and compassion, among others. The four largest sects of Hinduism are the Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism and Smartism.\nHinduism is the world's third largest religion, There are approximately 1.15 billion Hindus which are 15-16% of the global population. The vast majority of Hindus live in India, Nepal and Mauritius. Hindus are also found in other countries.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Hindu\" is taken from the Indo-Aryan/Sanskrit word \" Sapta Sindhu\", which is Sanskrit name for the Indus River which lies west of the border of India and Pakistan. According to Gavin Flood, The word Hindu was used by Persians for the people who live beyond the Indus River, Inscription of Darius I which was written around 550\u2013486 BCE also refer Hindu as the people who live beyond the Indus River. These records didn't refer Hindu as a religion. The earliest record which refer \"Hindu\" as religion may be the 7th-century CE Chinese text \"Record of the Western Regions\" by Xuanzang, and 14th-century Persian text \"Futuhu's-salatin\" by 'Abd al-Malik Isami. This is because the name if the religion is called Hinduism, not Hindu.\nThe Arabic term \"al-Hind\" referred to the people who live across the River Indus. It means \"Land of Hindus\" which is what it stood for until Muslims started to come into India. \nThe term \"Hindu\" was later used in some Sanskrit texts such as the later \"Rajataranginis\" of Kashmir (Hinduka, c. 1450) and some 16th- to 18th-century Bengali Gaudiya Vaishnava texts including \"Chaitanya Charitamrita\" and \"Chaitanya Bhagavata\". These texts used to distinguish Hindus from Muslims who are called Yavanas (foreigners) or Mlecchas (barbarians), with the 16th-century \"Chaitanya Charitamrita\" text and the 17th century \"Bhakta Mala\" text using the phrase \"Hindu dharma\". In the end of the 18th century the European merchants and colonists began to call followers of Indian religions collectively as \"Hindus\". The term \"Hinduism\", then spelled \"Hindooism\", was introduced into the English language in the 18th-century to denote the religious, philosophical, and cultural traditions native to India.\nDefinitions.\nHinduism is diverse on ideas on spirituality and traditions, but has no ecclesiastical order, no unquestionable religious authorities, no governing body, no prophet(s) nor any binding holy book; Hindus can choose to be polytheistic, pantheistic, monotheistic, monistic, agnostic, atheistic or humanist. Because of the wideness and openness of Hinduism, arriving at a definition is difficult. Hinduism has been defined as a religion, a religious tradition, a set of religious beliefs, and \"a way of life.\" From a Western point of view, Hinduism like other faiths is referred to as a religion. In India the term \"dharma\" is preferred, which is broader than the western term \"religion\".\nThe study of India and its cultures and religions, and the definition of \"Hinduism\", has been shaped by the interests of colonialism and by Western notions of religion. Since the 1990s, those influences and its outcomes have been the topic of debate among scholars of Hinduism, and have also been taken over by critics of the Western view on India.\nBeliefs.\nHindu beliefs include (but are not restricted to) Dharma (ethics/duties), (the continuing cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth), Karma (Every action has a reaction), Moksha (liberation from samsara or liberation in this life), and the various Yogas (paths or practices).\nPurusharthas (objectives of human life).\nHindism have accepted four proper goals or aims of human life: Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. These are known as the Puru\u1e63\u0101rthas:\nDharma (righteousness, ethics).\nDharma is considered one of the most important goal of a human being in Hinduism. Dharma is considered Important because it is dharma which makes running of Universe and life possible, and includes duties, virtues and \"right way of living\". Hindu Dharma includes the religious duties, moral rights and duties of each individual, as well as behaviors that enable social order, right conduct, and those that are virtuous. The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad states it as:\nIn the Mahabharata, Krishna says it is Dharma which is holding both this-worldly and other-worldly affairs. (Mbh 12.110.11). The word \"San\u0101tana\" means \"eternal\", \"perennial\", or \"forever\"; thus, \"San\u0101tana Dharma\" means that it is the dharma that has neither beginning nor end.\nArtha (livelihood, wealth).\nArtha is second goal of life in Hinduism which means pursuit of wealth for livelihood, and economic prosperity. It includes political life, diplomacy and material well-being. The Artha includes all \"means of life\", activities and resources that enables one to be in a state one wants to be in, wealth, career and financial security. The aim of artha is considered an important aim of human life in Hinduism.\nK\u0101ma (sensual pleasure).\nK\u0101ma (Sanskrit, Pali; Devanagari: \u0915\u093e\u092e) means desire, wish, passion, pleasure of the senses, the enjoyment of life, affection, or love, with or without sexual connotations. In Hinduism, Kama is considered an important and healthy goal of human life when pursued without sacrificing Dharma, Artha and Moksha.\nMok\u1e63a (liberation, freedom from samsara).\nMoksha (Sanskrit: ') or mukti (Sanskrit: ) is the ultimate, most important goal in Hinduism. In one school Moksha means liberation from sorrow, suffering and sa\u1e43s\u0101ra (birth-rebirth cycle). In other schools of Hinduism, such as monistic, moksha means self-realization,\"realizing the whole universe as the Self\".\nKarma and samsara.\n\"Karma\" means \"action\", \"work\", or \"deed\", and also the vedic theory of cause and effect\". The theory is a combination of (1) causality that may be moral or non-moral; (2) moralization, that is good or bad actions have consequences; and (3) rebirth. Karma theory means \"Whatever experience currently a man have is due to his/her past work\". These actions may be in a person's current life, or, in some schools of Hinduism, actions in their past lives. This cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth is called \"samsara\". Liberation from samsara through moksha is believed to ensure lasting happiness and peace. Hindu scriptures teach that the future depends on the current action and our past deeds.\nMoksha.\nThe ultimate goal of life,according to Hinduism is \"moksha\", \"nirvana\" or \"samadhi\", but is understood in different ways in different schools.For example, Advaita Vedanta says that after attaining moksha a person knows their \"soul, self\" and identifies it as one with Brahman (Ultimate reality or cause of everything). The followers of Dvaita (dualistic) schools,state that after attaining moksha a person identify \"soul, self\" different from Brahman but very close to Brahman, and after attaining moksha one will spend eternity in a loka (higher planes). According to theistic schools of Hinduism, moksha is liberation from samsara, while for other schools such as the monistic school, moksha is possible in current life and is a psychological concept.\nConcept of God.\nHinduism is diverse and Hinduism include monotheism, polytheism, panentheism, pantheism, pandeism, monism, and atheism among others; Basically it depends on individuals choice and that's why sometimes Hinduism is referred to as henotheistic (i.e., involving devotion to a single god while accepting the existence of others), but any such term is an over generalization.\nHindus believe that all living creatures have a soul. This soul or true \"self\" of every living being is called the \"\u0101tman\". The soul is believed to be eternal. According to the monistic/pantheistic (non-dualist) theologies of Hinduism (such as Advaita Vedanta school), this Atman is indistinct from Brahman. The goal of life, according to the Advaita school, is to realise that one's soul is identical to supreme soul, that the supreme soul is present in everything and everyone, all life is interconnected and there is oneness in all life. Dualistic schools (see Dvaita and Bhakti) sees Brahman as a Supreme Being separate from individual souls. They worship the Supreme Being variously as Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva, or Shakti, depending upon the sect. God is called \"Ishvara\", \"Bhagavan\", \"Parameshwara\", \"Devadu\" or \"Devi\", and these terms have different meanings in different schools of Hinduism. Devi is typically used when refereeing to a female goddess.\nThe Hindu scriptures refer to celestial entities called \"Devas\" (or ' in feminine form; ' used synonymously for \"Deva\" in Hindi), which in English means demi-\"gods\" or \"heavenly beings\". The devas are an integral part of Hindu culture and are depicted in art, architecture and through icons, and stories about them are related in the scriptures, particularly in Indian epic poetry and the Puranas. They are, however, often distinguished from Ishvara, a personal god, with many Hindus worshipping Ishvara in one of its particular manifestations as their \"\", or chosen ideal. The choice is a matter of individual preference, and of regional and family traditions. The multitude of Devas are considered as manifestations of Brahman.\nMain traditions.\nHinduism has no central doctrinal authority and Hindus do not claim to belong to any particular sect or tradition. Four major sects in Hinduism are: \"Vaishnavism\", \"Shaivism\", \"Shaktism\" and \"Smarthism\".\nVaishnavism is the tradition that worships Vishnu and his avatars, such as Krishna and Rama. The people of this sect are generally non-ascetic, monastic. These practices include community dancing, singing of Kirtans and Bhajans, with sound and music believed by some to have meditative and spiritual powers.\nShaivism is the tradition that focuses on Shiva. Shaivas are more attracted to ascetic individualism, and it has several sub-schools. Their practices include Bhakti-style devotion but they leaned to philosply such as Advaita and Yoga. Some Shaivas worship in temples, but some practice yoga, striving to be one with Shiva within. Shaivas visualize god as half male, half female, as a combination of the male and female principles (Ardhanarishvara). Shaivism is related to Shaktism, wherein Shakti is seen as wife of Shiva. Shaivism is mainly practiced in the Himalayan north from Kashmir to Nepal, and in south India.\nShaktism focuses on goddess worship of Shakti or Devi as cosmic mother, and it is mainly worshipped in northeastern and eastern states of India such as Assam and Bengal. Devi is depicted as in gentler forms like Parvati, the consort of Shiva; or, as warrior goddesses like Kali and Durga. Community celebrations include festivals, some of which include processions and idol immersion into sea or other water bodies.\nSmartism worship all the major Hindu deities like Shiva, Vishnu, Shakti, Ganesha, Surya and Skanda. The Smarta tradition developed during the (early) Classical Period of Hinduism around the beginning of the Common Era, when Hinduism emerged from the interaction between Brahmanism and local traditions. The Smarta tradition is very much same as Advaita Vedanta, and consider Adi Shankara as its founder or reformer, who considered worship of God-with-attributes (saguna Brahman) as a journey towards ultimately realizing God-without-attributes (nirguna Brahman, Atman, Self-knowledge).\nHindu texts.\nHindu text are world's oldest and had been written in Sanskrit and Tamil. The oldest Text is Rig Veda which is about 4000 years old.Hindu Texts can be divided in two parts:\nShruti.\nShruti\u00a0or\u00a0Shruthi\u00a0(Sanskrit:\u00a0\u0936\u094d\u0930\u0941\u0924\u093f;\u00a0IAST:\u00a0\"\u015aruti\";\u00a0IPA/Sanskrit:\u00a0[\u0283rut\u032ai]) in Sanskrit means \"that which is heard\" These ancient\u00a0religious texts\u00a0comprising the central canon of\u00a0Hinduism includes the four\u00a0Vedas\u00a0including its four types of attached texts - the\u00a0Samhitas, the\u00a0Brahmanas, the\u00a0Aranyakas\u00a0and the early\u00a0Upanishads\nSmriti.\nSmriti\u00a0(Sanskrit:\u00a0\u0938\u094d\u092e\u0943\u0924\u093f,\u00a0IAST:\u00a0\"Sm\u1e5bti\"), means \"that which is remembered\" are a body of\u00a0Hindu\u00a0texts. Smriti were the texts which were remembered and were spread through mouth from generation to generation. Smriti includes (the\u00a0Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata\u00a0and\u00a0R\u0101m\u0101yana), the\u00a0Dharmas\u016btras\u00a0and\u00a0Dharma\u015b\u0101stras\u00a0(or Smriti\u015b\u0101stras), the Arthasa\u015b\u0101stras, the\u00a0Pur\u0101nas, the K\u0101vya or poetical literature.\nFestivals.\nThere are many Hindu Festivals celebrated throughout the world but mainly in India and Nepal. These festivals include worship, offerings to deities, fasting, rituals, fairs, charity, celebrations, Puja, etc. The festivals mainly celebrate events from Hindu mythology, changes in season, changes in Solar System. Different sects celebrate different festivals but festivals like Diwali, Holi, Shivratri, Raksha Bandhan, Janamashtmi etc. are celebrated by the majority of Hindus.\nHistory.\nPeriodisation.\nHinduism can be divided in following ages\nPictures.\nThe origins of Hinduism are unknown but the earliest traces of Hinduism come from Mesolithic in the sites such as the rock paintings of Bhimbetka rock shelters dating to a period of 30,000 BCE or older, as well as neolithic times. Some of the religious practices can be considered to have originated in 4000 BCE. Several tribal religions still exist, though their practices may not resemble those of prehistoric religions.\nVarna.\nAccording to one view, the Varna, which later transformed into caste system during the British rule, shows how strongly many have felt about each person following his or her dharma, or destined path. Many Hindus say it goes against the true meaning of dharma. However, Varna plays a big role in Hindu society. It's later transformation as Caste system by the British rule of India lost favor and became illegal after the independence of India.\nTemples.\nPuja (worship) takes place in the Mandir (temple). Mandirs vary in size from small village shrines to large buildings, surrounded by walls. People can also visit the Mandir at any time to pray and participate in the bhajans (religious songs). Hindus also worship at home and often have a special room with a shrine to particular gods.\nTemple construction in India started nearly 2000 years ago. The oldest temples that were built of brick and wood no longer exist. Stone later became the preferred material. Temples marked the transition of Hinduism from the Vedic religion of ritual sacrifices to a religion of Bhakti or love and devotion to a personal deity. Temple construction and mode of worship is governed by ancient Sanskrit scriptures called agamas, of which there are several, which deal with individual deities. There are substantial differences in architecture, customs, rituals and traditions in temples in different parts of India. During the ritual consecration of a temple, the presence of the universal all-encompassing Brahman is invoked into the main stone deity of the temple, through ritual, thereby making the deity and the temple sacred and divine\nAlternative cultures of worship.\nThe Bhakti schools.\nThe Bhakti (Devotional) school takes its name from the Hindu term that signifies a blissful, selfless and overwhelming love of God as the beloved Father, Mother, Child, or whatever relationship finds appeal in the devotee's heart. The philosophy of Bhakti seeks to tap into the universal divinity through personal form, which explains the proliferation of so many gods and goddesses in India, often reflecting the singular inclinations of small regions or groups of people. Seen as a form of Yoga, or union, it seeks to dissolve the ego in God, since consciousness of the body and limited mind as self is seen to be a divisive factor in spiritual realization. Essentially, it is God who effects all change, who is the source of all works, who acts through the devotee as love and light. 'Sins' and evil-doings of the devotee are said to fall away of their own accord, the devotee shriven, limitedness even transcended, through the love of God. The Bhakti movements rejuvenated Hinduism through their intense expression of faith and their responsiveness to the emotional and philosophical needs of India. They can rightly be said to have affected the greatest wave of change in Hindu prayer and ritual since ancient times.\nThe most popular means of expressing love for God in the Hindu tradition has been through \"puja\", or ritual devotion, frequently using the aid of a \"\" (statue) in conjunction with the singing or chanting of meditational prayer in the form of mantras.\nDevotional songs called bhajans (written primarily from the 14th-17th centuries), kirtan (praise), and arti (a filtered down form of Vedic fire ritual) are sometimes sung in conjunction with performance of puja. This rather organic system of devotion attempts to aid the individual in connecting with God through symbolic medium. It is said, however, that the \"bhakta\", through a growing connection with God, is eventually able to avoid all external form and is immersed entirely in the bliss of undifferentiated Love in Truth.\nAltogether, bhakti resulted in a mass of devotional literature, music and art that has enriched the world and gave India renewed spiritual impetus, one eschewing unnecessary ritual and artificial social boundaries. See bhakti yoga for more.\nTantrism.\nAccording to the most famous Western Tantrik scholar, Sir John Woodroffe (pseudonym Arthur Avalon): \"The Indian Tantras, which are numerous, constitute the Scripture (Shastra) of the Kaliyuga, and as such are the voluminous source of present and practical orthodox 'Hinduism'. The Tantra Shastra is, in fact, and whatever be its historical origin, a development of the Vaidika Karmakanda, promulgated to meet the needs of that age. Shiva says: 'For the benefit of men of the Kali age, men bereft of energy and dependent for existence on the food they eat, the Kaula doctrine, O auspicious one! is given' (Chap. IX., verse 12). To the Tantra we must therefore look if we would understand aright both ritual, yoga, and sadhana of all kinds, as also the general principles of which these practices are but the objective expression.\" (Introduction to Sir John Woodroffe's translation of \"Mahanirvana Tantra.\")\nThe word \"tantra\" means \"treatise\" or \"continuum\", and is applied to a variety of mystical, occult, medical and scientific works as well as to those which we would now regard as \"tantric\". Most tantras were written in the late Middle Ages and sprang from Hindu cosmology and Yoga.\nImportant symbolism and themes in Hinduism.\nAhimsa and the cow.\nMany Hindus are vegetarians (do not eat meat) because of their respect for life. About 30% of today's Hindu population, especially in orthodox communities in South India, in certain northerly states like Gujarat, and in many Brahmin areas around the subcontinent, are vegetarian.\nMost Hindus who do eat meat do not eat beef. Some do not even use leather products. This is most likely because many Hindus have relied so heavily on the cow for all sorts of dairy products, tilling of fields and fuel for fertiliser that its status as a willing 'caretaker' of humanity grew to identifying it as an almost motherly figure. Thus, while most Hindus do not worship the cow, and rules against eating beef arose long after the Vedas had been written, it still has an honored place in Hindu society. It is said that Krishna is both Govinda (herder of cows) and Gopala (protector of cows), and Shiva's attendant is Nandi, the bull. With the stress on vegetarianism (which is usually followed even by meat-eating Hindus on religious days or special occasions) and the sacred nature of the cow, it is no wonder that most holy cities and areas in India have a ban on selling meat-products and there is a movement among Hindus to ban cow-slaughter not only in specific regions, but in all of India.\nHindu symbols.\nHindus use many symbols and signs. The two most important symbols used by Hindus are the \"Aum\" and the \"Swastika (Hinduism)\".\nForms of worship: murtis and mantras.\nContrary to popular belief, practiced Hinduism is neither polytheistic nor strictly monotheistic. The various Hindu gods and avatars that are worshipped by Hindus are understood as different forms of One truth, sometimes seen as beyond a mere god and as a formless Divine Ground (Brahman), akin but not limited to monism, or as one monotheistic principle like Vishnu or Shiva.\nWhether believing in the One source as formless (nirguna brahman, without attributes) or as a personal god (saguna Brahman, with attributes), Hindus understand that the one truth may be seen as different to different people. Hinduism encourages devotees to describe and develop a personal relationship with their chosen deity (ishta devata) in the form of a god or goddess.\nWhile some censuses hold worshippers of one form or another of Vishnu (known as \"Vaishnavs\") to be at 80% and those of Shiva (called \"Shaivaites\") and Shakti at the remaining 20%, such figures are perhaps misleading. The vast majority of Hindus worship many gods as varicolored forms of the same prism of Truth. Among the most popular are Vishnu (as Krishna or Rama), Shiva, Devi (the Mother as many female deities, such as Lakshmi, Saraswati, Kali and Durga), Ganesha, Skanda and Hanuman.\nWorship of the said deities is often done through the aid of pictures or icons (\"murti\") which are said not to be God themselves but conduits for the devotee's consciousness, markers for the human soul that signify the ineffable and illimitable nature of the love and grandeur of God. They are symbols of the greater principle, representing and are never presumed to \"be\" the concept or entity itself. Thus, Hindu image worship is a form of iconolatry, in which the symbols are venerated as putative sigils of divinity, as opposed to idolatry, a charge often levied (erroneously) at Hindus. For more details on this form of worship, see murti.\nMantra.\nHindus use several prayers and group of words. Some group of words are called mantras.\nThese words are said to give the speaker a deeper concentration and understanding, thus coming closer to Brahman.\nA well known mantra is \"om\" or \"aum\". It symbolizes Brahman, and is often the opening word in many prayers.\nTo pronounce a mantra well, you should say it slowly, and in a deep voice.\nGeographic distribution.\nThe nations of India, Mauritius, and Nepal as well as the Indonesian island of Bali have more people who are Hindus than people who are not Hindus.In these nations, specially Nepal and India Hinduism is very popular.\nThese countries also have many Hindus:\nThere are also strong Hindu communities in the countries of the ex-Soviet Union, especially in Russia and Poland. The Indonesian islands of Java, Sulawesi, Sumatra, and Borneo also have big native Hindu populations. In its Yoga stream, Hinduism is even more widespread all over the world with 30 million (less than one percent can not be 30 million for US population) Hindus in the United States alone."}
{"id": "5963", "revid": "7807030", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5963", "title": "List of elements by symbol", "text": "This is a list of elements by atomic number with symbol."}
{"id": "5964", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5964", "title": "List of elements by atomic number", "text": ""}
{"id": "5966", "revid": "1057016", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5966", "title": "Periodic table (big)", "text": ""}
{"id": "5967", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5967", "title": "Periodic table (metals and non-metals)", "text": "Color coding for atomic numbers:"}
{"id": "5968", "revid": "1050767", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5968", "title": "Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s", "text": "Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s (1485 - 2 December 1547) was an explorer and Conquistador from Spain. Between 1519 and 1521, he conquered the Aztec Empire of emperor Montezuma II where Mexico is today. He introduced vanilla and chocolate to Europe.\nEarly life.\nCortes was born Medell\u00edn, Extremadura province, in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain. He went to Salamanca University, but dropped out at the age of 17. After two years, Cortes failed and finished schooling, returning home. This, however, was later helpful, as he knew how the law of Spain worked.\nHernan's journeys started in 1502 when he had heard stories about the New World. He then went on a journey led by Nicolas de Ovando and Diego Velazquez to the West Indies. He turned out to be a good soldier under the orders of Vel\u00e1zquez.\nConquest of Hispaniola and Cuba.\nHe went to the New World in 1506. In 1511, he took part in the Spanish conquest of Hispaniola and Cuba, where the Arawak people lived. In 1513, the Spanish built the town Bayamo. The next year, they built Trinidad, Santo Espiritu, Puerto Principe, and Santiago de Cuba. \nIn 1519, Cortes set out from Cuba with a fleet of ships, 600 men, and about 20 horses. They went to Yucat\u00e1n to look for gold and to get Mexico ready for colonization. They landed in Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula and met Jeronimo de Aguilar, a priest who lived through a shipwreck. He knew a lot about the Maya, who owned this section of land. \nCortes took over Yucat\u00e1n by winning a battle against the people of Tabasco. \nHe met a woman, La Malinche, who knew the Maya and Nahuatl languages. She acted as his translator when he talked with Maya and Aztec people.\nConquest of Mexico.\nIn July of 1519, the Spanish took over Veracruz, and left 100 men there. That August, Cortes went to Tenochtitlan, the capital of the Aztec Empire. He brought 400 men, 15 horsemen, and 15 cannons with him. On his way, he met Native American tribes like the Nahuas of Tlaxcala and the Totonacs of Cempoala.\nIn October 1519, Cortes gathered his soldiers and around three thousand Tlaxcalteca (who had long been enemies of the Aztecs). His goal was to scare the Aztecs in Tenochtitlan. He then went on a killing spree and burned down the city. When he came to Tenochtitlan, he had a vast army of Aztec enemies. \nCort\u00e9s was surprised that Tenochtitlan was as great as Constantinople. In November, the emperor of the Aztecs, Moctezuma II, welcomed Cortes and his army. Montezuma II let them into Aztec territory, where they learned the Aztecs' weaknesses and then destroyed them. The emperor gave them gold, and Cortes later told King Charles V that the Aztecs might have thought he was one of their gods: Quetzalcoatl, a feathered serpent with fair skin and a beard. Cortes quickly realized that some Spaniards had been attacked on the coast and planned to kidnap Moctezuma and his house and make him swear loyalty to King Charles V.\nOn the night of June 30 \u2013 July 1, 1520 the Aztecs attacked, but the majority of the Spanish escaped and allied themselves with enemies of the Aztec empire. Later, in 1521, with his army of a few Spaniards and many natives, Cort\u00e9s destroyed Tenochtitlan and took over the Aztec Empire. \nLater life.\nCort\u00e9s returned from Honduras and was Governor of the Viceroyalty of New Spain for a while. Later, he went back to Europe with a lot of treasure. He died in Seville, Spain, in 1547 from pleurisy."}
{"id": "5974", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5974", "title": "Bible study", "text": "Bible study is intensive reading of the Bible.\nFor Christians, study of the Bible is often part of daily life. A lot of other people are also interested in this piece of world literature.\nIn Europe before the 16th century it was not possible for most people to study the Bible. Books were written using only the languages Latin and Greek. Only people who had learned to read those languages could study the Bible. The Roman Catholic Church said people could not translate the Bible into other languages, for example Italian or English because many people could not read and it took the lifetime of a monk, by himself, to translate the Bible. \nWhen the Reformation started in 16th century Europe, the Bible was translated into several languages. Many books were printed in these languages. People were then able to read the Bible in their own language."}
{"id": "5975", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5975", "title": "Medlar", "text": "The medlar is a tree and the name of the fruit of this tree. Its Latin name is \"Crataegus germanica\", or \"German medlar\", but it is not from Germany. It grows in the Near East and South-Eastern Europe, and the Romans took it to Germany. Near the Caspian Sea, people grew the medlar about three thousand years ago. It came to Greece in about 700 BC and to Rome in about 200 BC. It was an important fruit plant in Roman and medieval times. But by 1600-1700, people started eating other fruits and not the medlar. Today people do not grow it very often.\nThe medlar needs warm summers and mild (not too cold) winters and likes to grow in sunny, dry places. In the best places, the plant can grow up to eight metres tall. The medlar is \"deciduous\": it is not green all year. Usually, it is shorter than a tree. It lives between thirty and fifty years. Medlar leaves are dark green, maximum fifteen centimetres long and three centimetres wide. The plant has flowers in late spring. The flowers are white. The red-brown medlar fruits are similar to apples and grow to two to three centimetres. They are very hard and acidic, and we can only eat them after the cold weather makes them soft."}
{"id": "5976", "revid": "65683", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5976", "title": "Atheism", "text": "Atheism is rejecting the belief in a god or gods.\nIt is the opposite of theism, which is the belief that at least one god exists. A person who rejects belief in gods is called an atheist. Adding an a, meaning \"without\", before the word theism results in atheism, or literally, \"without theism\".\nAtheism is not the same as agnosticism: agnostics say that there is no way to \"know\" whether gods exist or not. Being an agnostic does not have to mean a person rejects or believes in god. Some agnostics are theists, believing in god. The theologian Kierkegaard is an example. Other agnostics are atheists. Gnosticism refers to a claim of knowledge. A gnostic has sufficient knowledge to make a claim. Adding an a, meaning \"without\", before the word gnostic results in agnostic, or literally, \"without knowledge\".\nWhile theism refers to \"belief\" in one or more gods, gnosticism refers to \"knowledge\". In practice, most people simply identify as a theist, atheist, or agnostic.\nHistory of atheism.\nAnaxagoras was the first known atheist. He was an Ionian Greek, born in Clazomenae in what is now Asia Minor. He travelled to other Greek cities, and his ideas were well known in Athens. Socrates mentioned that his works could be bought in Athens for a drachma. Eventually he was prosecuted and condemned for impiety, and banished from Athens.\nAnaxagoras' beliefs were interesting. He thought the Sun was not a god, and was not animated (alive). The Sun was \"a red-hot mass many times larger than the Peloponnese\". The Moon was a solid body with geographical features, and made of the same substance as the Earth. The world was a globe (spherical).\nReasons for atheism.\nAtheists often give reasons why they do not believe in a god or gods. Three of the reasons that they often give are the problem of evil, the argument from inconsistent revelations, and the argument from nonbelief. Not all atheists think these reasons provide complete proof that gods cannot exist, but these are the reasons given to support rejecting belief that gods exist.\nSome atheists do not believe in any god because they feel that there is no evidence for any god nor gods and goddesses, so believing any type of theism means believing unproved assumptions. These atheists think a simpler explanation for everything is methodological naturalism which means that only natural things exist. Occam's razor shows simple explanations without many unproved guesses are more likely to be true.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"atheism\" comes from the Greek language. It can be divided into \"a-\" (\u1f04), a Greek prefix meaning \"without\", and \"theos\" (\u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2), meaning \"god\", and recombined to form \"without gods\" or \"godless\". In Ancient Greece it also meant \"impious\".\nStarting in about the 5th century BC, the word came to describe people who were \"severing relations with the gods\" or \"denying the gods\". Before then, the meaning had been closer to \"impious\". There is also the abstract noun, (\"\"), \"atheism\".\nCicero transliterated the Greek word into the Latin \"atheos\". This word was often used in the debate between early Christians and Hellenists. Each side used it to label the other, in a bad way.\nKaren Armstrong writes that \"During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the word 'atheist' was still reserved exclusively for polemic ... The term 'atheist' was an insult. Nobody would have dreamed of calling \"himself\" an atheist.\"\n\"Atheism\" was first used to describe an openly positive belief in late 18th-century Europe, meaning disbelief in the monotheistic Abrahamic god.\nThe 20th century saw the term expand to refer to disbelief in all deities. However, it is still common in Western society to describe atheism as simply \"disbelief in God\".\nAtheism in society.\nIn many places, it is (or was) a crime to make public the idea of atheism. Examples would be to claim the Bible or Qur'an could not be true, or to speak or write that there is no god.\nMuslim apostasy, that is becoming an atheist or believing in a god other than Allah, may be a dangerous act in places with many conservative Muslim people. Many religious courts have punished and some still punish this act with the death penalty. Many countries still have laws against atheism. Although it is considered by most Muslim scholars to be a sin, not all agree, that is should be punishable. For example, \"Surat Al Kafirun\" in Qur'an is clearly stating everyone's freedom to choose his religion and beliefs. The laws against Athiesm in the Muslim World is not universal, and is based on each society's interpretation of the Holy Book.\nAtheism is becoming more common, mainly in South America, North America, Oceania and Europe (by percentage of people that had a religion before and started to be atheist).\nIn many countries, mainly in the Western world, there are laws that protect atheists' right to express their atheistic belief (freedom of speech). This means that atheists have the same rights under the law as everyone else. \"Freedom of religion\" in international law and treaties includes the freedom to not have a religion.\nToday, about 2.3% of the world's population describes itself as atheist. About 11.9% is described as nontheist.\nBetween 64% and 65% of Japanese describe themselves as atheists, agnostics, or non-believers,\nand up to 48% in Russia. The percentage of such people in European Union member states ranges between 6% (Italy) and 85% (Sweden). In the United States, according to Pew and Gallup\u2014two of the most reputable polling firms in America\u2014both conclude that about 10% of Americans say they do not believe in God, and this figure has been slowly creeping up over the decades. The real number is likely higher than this, due to the stigma around atheism.\nDefining atheism.\nPeople disagree about what atheism means. They disagree on when to call certain people atheists or not.\nImplicit and explicit atheism.\nAtheism is generally described as not believing in God.\nGeorge H. Smith created the expressions \"implicit atheism\"\" \"and \"explicit atheism\" to describe the difference between different types of Atheism. \"Implicit atheism\" is when you do not believe in God because you do not know about the concept of God. \"Explicit atheism\" is when you do not believe in God after learning about the idea.\nIn 1772, Baron d'Holbach said that \"All children are born atheists; they have no idea of God\".\nIn 1979 George H. Smith said that: \"The man who is unacquainted with theism is an atheist because he does not believe in a god. This category would also include the child [who is able to] grasp the issues involved, but who is still unaware of those issues. The fact that this child does not believe in god qualifies him as an atheist\".\nThose two quotes describe implicit atheism.\nErnest Nagel disagrees with Smith's definition of atheism as an \"absence of theism\", saying only \"explicit\" atheism is true atheism. This means that Nagel believes that to be an atheist, a person needs to know about God and then reject the idea of God.\n\"Weak\" and \"strong\" atheism.\nPhilosophers like Antony Flew,\nhave looked at \"strong\" (sometimes called positive) atheism against \"weak\" (sometimes called negative) atheism. According to this idea, anyone who does not believe in a god or gods is either a weak or a strong atheist.\nStrong atheism is the certain belief that no god exists. An older way of saying strong atheism is to say \"positive atheism\". Weak atheism is all other forms of not believing in a god or gods. An older way of saying weak atheism is to say \"negative atheism\" These terms have been used more in philosophical writing and in Catholic beliefs.\nsince at least 1813.\nUnder this definition of atheism, most agnostics are weak atheists.\nMichael Martin says that agnosticism includes weak atheism. Some agnostics, including Anthony Kenny, disagree. They think being an agnostic is different from being an atheist. They think atheism is no different from believing in a god, because both require belief. This overlooks the reality that agnostics also have their own belief or \"claim to knowledge\" \nAgnostics say that it cannot be known if a god or gods exist. In their view, strong atheism requires a leap of faith.\nAtheists usually respond by saying that there is no difference between an idea about religion with no proof, and an idea about other things\nThe lack of proof that god does not exist does not mean that there is no god, but it also does not mean that there is a god.\nScottish philosopher J.J.C. Smart says that \"sometimes a person who is really an atheist may describe herself, even passionately, as an agnostic because of unreasonable generalised philosophical skepticism which would preclude us from saying that we know anything whatever, except perhaps the truths of mathematics and formal logic\".\nSo, some popular atheist authors such as Richard Dawkins like to show the difference between theist, agnostic and atheist positions by the probability assigned to the statement \"God exists\".\nAtheism in daily life.\nIn everyday life, many people define natural phenomena without the need of a god or gods. They do not deny the existence of one or more gods, they simply say that this existence is not necessary. Gods do not provide a purpose to life, nor influence it, according to this view.\nMany scientists practice what they call methodological naturalism. They silently adopt philosophical naturalism and use the scientific method. Their belief in a god does not affect their results.\nPractical atheism can take different forms:\nTheoretical atheism.\nTheoretic atheism tries to find arguments against the existence of god, and to disprove the arguments of theism, such as the argument from design or Pascal's Wager. These theoretical reasons have many forms, most of them are ontological or epistemological. Some rely on psychology or sociology.\nPositions of well-known philosophers.\nImmanuel Kant.\nAccording to Immanuel Kant, there can be no proof of a supreme being that is made using reason. In his work, \"Critique of Pure Reason\", he tries to show that all attempts of either proving the existence of God, or disproving it, end in logical contradictions. Kant says that it is impossible to know whether there are any higher beings. This makes him an agnostic.\nLudwig Feuerbach.\nLudwig Feuerbach published \"The Essence of Christianity\" in 1841. In his work he postulates the following:\nThe following phrases sum up Feuerbach's writing:"}
{"id": "5978", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5978", "title": "Hippocrates", "text": "Hippocrates (c. 460 \u2013 c. 370 BC) was a Greek doctor who is called the \"father of medicine\". He was the first person to teach that people got sick for scientific reasons. Previously, people believed that disease was caused by angry gods.\nMany of Hippocrates' writings are still important to doctors. For example, patient confidentiality, meaning that doctors can only discuss a patient with the patient themselves. Another of his ideas is to never knowingly lead a patient to suffering or death. These kinds of ideas are part of medical ethics.\nThe Hippocratic Oath is named after him. This is a set of rules which doctors promise to obey. This is an example of a modern \"Hippocratic Oath\" used at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine. I do solemnly swear by all I hold most sacred:"}
{"id": "5981", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5981", "title": "Commensurability", "text": "Commensurability is a concept in the philosophy of science. Scientific theories are described as \"commensurable\" if one can compare them to find out which is more accurate. If there is no way one can compare them to determine which is more accurate, they are \"incommensurable\".\nBehind this is the idea that it is possible to see the world in multiple ways, and that there is not one fair method to see which way is right. Some think that scientific traditions (or \"paradigms\") can be incommensurable: it is not really possible to say which one is right. This idea has been defended by Thomas Kuhn. He wrote: \"when paradigms change, the world changes with them\". Paul Feyerabend was another philosopher who said that incommensurability was possible in scientific topics. He wrote that it is important to remember this, because it means that it is possible to say things that are not scientific, but also not wrong. These ideas were mainly aimed at Karl Popper and his ideas on falsification.\nTwo theories may not be comparable if one cannot find a way to compare them and decide which is right.\nIn popular culture.\nThe concept of incommensurability is dramatized in the 2006 movie \"Idiocracy\", when U.S. Army scientist Joe Bauers attempts to explain before a full Cabinet meeting his theory that the nation's crops would be better irrigated with water rather than with a sports drink."}
{"id": "5983", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5983", "title": "Harvest", "text": "Harvest means to collect what has been planted and grown in the ground. It is usually done by farmers, and in the fall season. This is also called picking crops. Crop failure (also known as harvest failure) is a loss or reduced crop yield due to plants being damaged, killed, or destroyed. Sometimes it brings famine.\n\"Harvest\" can also mean to collect other things than plants such as cultivated bivalves including oysters, scallops, and other animals."}
{"id": "6010", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6010", "title": "ELISPOT", "text": "ELISPOT stands for \"Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Spot Assay\". It is a laboratory technique for detecting cells that make (or \"secrete\") various substances. These substances include specific types of cytokines or antibodies. The ELISPOT method is typically used with blood cells, and is a helpful tool in studying the human immune system and various treatments for disease (e.g. vaccines).\nIn the ELISPOT technique, tiny wells are used to contain the cells, with a variety of other substances. The substances cause colored spots to form near the cells that secrete the substances in question. These spots can then be counted manually (using a microscope, for example) or automatically using specialized equipment with computer vision capabilities.\nThe ELISPOT technique is very sensitive, and can detect even a single substance-producing cell. It is also very versatile, since it can be tailored to detect a wide variety of very specific secretions."}
{"id": "6011", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6011", "title": "List of biochemistry topics", "text": "This is a list of all the articles related to biochemistry.\nA.\nabiogenesis - adenine - adenosine diphosphate (ADP) - adenosine triphosphate (ATP) - albumin - allotrope - alpha helix - amino acid - amylase - antibiotic - antibody - antigen -\nB.\nB vitamin complex - base pair - bilirubin - benzene - biochemistry - bioluminescence - blood - blood type\nC.\ncarbohydrate - carbon dioxide - catabolism - cell - cell membrane - cellobiose - cellular respiration - cellulose - chemoautotroph - chloroplast - choline - chromatography - citric acid - coenzyme A - cytoplasm - cytokine - cytosine - cytosol -\nD.\ndeoxyribose - disaccharide - DNA - DNA replication -\nE.\nELISA - ELISPOT - energy level - enkephalin - enzyme - epinephrine - erythropoietin -\nF.\nfat - formaldehyde -\nG.\ngel electrophoresis - glycolysis - glycoprotein - granzyme - guanine -\nH.\nhemoglobin - hormone - hydrocarbon - hydrogen bond - hydrolysis -\nI.\nimmunoglobulin - immunology - insulin - intermolecular force - ion channel - ionic bond - isomer -\nK.\nkeratin - kinetic energy - Krebs cycle -\nL.\nLe Chatelier's principle - light-dependent reactions - light-independent reactions - Link reaction - lipid -\nM.\nmacromolecule - membrane protein - metabolism - microbiology - molecular biology - molecule - monosaccharide -\nN.\nNADPH - neurotransmitter - niacin - nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate - Nobel Prize in Chemistry - nucleic acid - nucleobase - nucleotide - nutrient - nutrition -\nO.\norganic chemistry - organic compound - osmosis - oxidation -\nP.\npeptide - pesticide - pH - photosynthesis - physiology - polymer - polysaccharide - potential energy - prion - protein - protein biosynthesis -\nR.\nredox - respiration (physiology) - riboflavin - ribose - ribosome - RNA -\nS.\nsaturated fat - scientific notation - sequence analysis - signal transduction - solvation - starch - substrate (biochemistry) - sugar - synapse\nT.\nT cell - thymine - toxin - trans fat - transcription (genetics) - translation (genetics) -\nU.\nunsaturated fat - uracil -\nV.\nvaccine - virus - vitamin - Vitamin A - Vitamin C - Vitamin D - Vitamin E - Vitamin K -\nY.\nyeast -"}
{"id": "6013", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6013", "title": "Aztecs", "text": "The Aztecs were Native American people who lived in Mesoamerica. They ruled the Aztec Empire from the 14th century to the 16th century.\nThe name \"Aztec\" comes from the phrase \"people from Aztlan\". Legends say that Aztlan was the first place the Aztecs ever lived. \"Aztlan\" means \"place of the herons\" in the Nahuatl language.p.\u00a08\nOften the term \"Aztec\" refers just to the people of Tenochtitlan. This was a city on an island in Lake Texcoco. These people called themselves the Mexica which is why the country is called Mexico, or the Nahua which is why their language is called Nahuatl.\nHistory.\nBefore the Aztec Empire conquered them, the indigenous (native) people lived in many separate city-states. These were small cities with farmland around them. Each state had its own ruler. Around 1100 AD, these city-states started to fight each other for power and control of the area's resources.\nHistorians think the Aztecs came to central Mesoamerica around 1200. They came from what is now northwest Mexico. According to historian Lisa Marty:\nBy 1325, the Aztecs had built Tenochtitlan on an island in Lake Texcoco. Tenochtitlan became a city-state that gradually became more and more powerful.\nBy about 1400, three city-states had grown into small empires. In 1428, these two empires fought the Tepanec War for control of the area. The Texcoco empire made an alliance with some other powerful city-states, including Tenochtitlan, and won the war. These allies were supposed to share power equally as they started to gain control of more land. However, by 1430, Tenochtitlan became the most powerful member of the alliance. It became the capital city of the Aztec Empire, and its ruler became the 'high king' of the Empire.\nThe Aztec Empire.\nThe Aztec Empire existed between about 1438 AD and 1521 AD. When the Empire was largest, it spread across most of Mesoamerica and controlled about 11,000,000 people.\nTenochtitlan.\nTenochtitlan was the capital city of the Aztec Empire. Tenochtitlan was one of the greatest cities of the world in that time. By the early 1500s, at least 200,000 people lived in the city. This made Tenochtitlan the largest city in the Americas before Christopher Columbus arrived.\nMexico City now covers the whole area where Tenochtitlan used to be.\nReligion.\nThe Aztecs believed in many gods. Two of the most important gods they worshipped were \"Huitzilopochtli\", the god of war and the sun, and \"Tlaloc\", the rain god. Another important god was \"Quetzalcoatl\" (feathered snake), the god of learning and civilization.\nThe Aztecs did many things to keep the gods happy. These things included human sacrifices. They believed this helped keep the world from ending. The Aztecs believed that the gods had created them, and that human sacrifice was the most powerful way of giving back the gift of life. The Aztecs also believed that the gods were in an almost never-ending struggle. The hearts and blood from the sacrifice fed the good gods to give them strength to fight the evil gods. The human sacrifices often took place on the Templo Mayor, the Aztecs' great pyramid temple. \nFood.\nThe Aztecs ate plants and vegetables that could grow easily in Mesoamerica. The main foods in the Aztec diet were maize, beans, and squash. They often used tomatoes and chili as spices. Aztec markets sold fruit, vegetables, spices, flowers, dogs, birds, and cocoa beans. They also created chocolate. However, they did not have sugar, so their chocolate was a strong liquid with chili in it. They also made an alcoholic drink called chocolatl. These foods later spread around the world.\nSocial structure.\nIn Aztec society, there were different social classes with different social statuses. The most important people were the rulers. The Aztecs' first king was Acamapichtli. Their last king was Cuauhtemoc. He surrendered control of the Aztec Empire to Hernan Cortes during the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire.\nNext were nobles. These were the Empire's powerful members of the government; great warriors; judges; and priests. These people enjoyed a high social status.\nThe next social class was the commoners (common people). These were the Empire's everyday workers. Most of them farmed, ran stores, or traded. Other workers included artisans, regular soldiers, and fishers. Commoners were allowed to own land as a group or a family. However, a single person was not allowed to own land.\nThe lowest social classes in Aztec society were serfs and then slaves. Slaves had no rights at all. They were bought and sold at Aztec markets. The Aztecs also sacrificed some prisoners of war to their gods. However, if they had the money, they could buy their own freedom and become commoners.\nFor most of the Aztec Empire's existence, it was very difficult to move between social classes. Usually, if a person was born in a social class, they would stay in that class for the rest of their life.\nAztecs had harsh punishments for crimes that seem simple to us now. For example, a person could get the death penalty for adultery; cutting down a living tree; moving the boundary of a field to make their land bigger and someone else's smaller; major theft; treason; disorderly conduct (causing trouble in public), drunkenness; and promiscuity. Under Aztec sumptuary law, a commoner could also get the death penalty for wearing cotton.p.\u00a088\nEducation.\nThe Aztecs studied astrology and used the movements of the planets and the stars to create different calendars. They had an accurate calendar which consisted of 365 days, based on the movements of the sun. They also had a religious calendar which was made up of 260 days.\nThe Aztecs also studied and taught many complex subjects, including geometry, mathematics, debate, law, music, poetry, architecture, and agriculture.\nSports.\nThe most popular Aztec sport was Tlachtili. They played this game using rubber balls and vertical hoops on opposite walls in the middle of the court. The game's goal was to shoot the ball into the hoop using their knees. The first team to score won the game.\nEnd of the Aztec Empire.\nBetween 1519 and 1521, the Spanish conquistador, Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, allied with Tlaxcala and other enemies of the Aztecs. The conquistadors defeated the Aztecs, took their empire, and made it into a Spanish colony. Some Aztecs did not want to fight against the soldiers of Cort\u00e9s, because they thought they were gods.\nAztecs today.\nToday many Mexicans have Aztec and other Native American forefathers. People still use Aztec symbols in Mexico. On the Mexican flag, there is a picture of an eagle on a cactus with a snake in its mouth. This was an Aztec symbol. Even the name \"Mexico\" is an Aztec word."}
{"id": "6014", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6014", "title": "Billion", "text": "Billion is a name for a large number. It may refer specifically to:\nBillion may also refer to: "}
{"id": "6027", "revid": "7861102", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6027", "title": "Richard Nixon", "text": "Richard Milhous Nixon (January 9, 1913 \u2013 April 22, 1994) was an American politician. He was the 37th president of the United States, serving from 1969 to 1974, when he became the only president to resign. Before that, Nixon was the 36th vice president (from 1953 to 1961 under President Dwight D. Eisenhower), and a U.S. Representative and Senator from California. He was a Republican.\nHis presidency is known for a start for diplomacy with China, a slow ending of the Vietnam War, domestic acts (such as OSHA and Environmental Protection) and an era of peace with the Soviet Union (communist Russia). He is also known for corruption and the Watergate scandal which resulted in the public losing trust in him and his impeachment process. The scandal caused his resignation.\nEarly life, belief &amp; Californian heritage.\nNixon was born on January 9, 1913 in his family's home in Yorba Linda, California, to Hannah and Francis Nixon. He is the only president born in California. He was named for King Richard the Lionhearted, and was raised as a Quaker. His brother Edward, was a businessman. Herbert Hoover was the only other United States President to belong to the Quaker faith (as a coincidence, Hoover was also one of just three presidents, one of whom was Nixon, to hail from California). Nixon was raised in Whittier, California. His father was of Scotch-Irish ancestry and his mother was of German, English, and Irish ancestry. He attended Whittier High School, Whittier College, and Duke University. He served in the Navy during World War II. Later, he married Thelma Nixon (later Patricia Nixon) and had two daughters, Tricia and Julie.\nHarvard Scholarship &amp; More.\nNixon received a scholarship to Harvard, but declined to help his family on the farm. Nixon was also tapped to join the FBI. He was very pleased, but at the last minute was rejected due to budget cuts.\nEarly political career.\nCongressional career.\nCalifornia congressman (1947\u20131950).\nNixon was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946. When in the House, he was a member of House Un-American Activities Commission, a group of Congressmen that tried to expose people in the United States who might have been Communists.\nU.S. Senate (1950\u20131953).\nHe was later elected a Senator in 1950 after running a controversial campaign against Helen Gahagan Douglas.\nVice president (1953\u20131961).\nIn the 1952 presidential election, Dwight D. Eisenhower selected Nixon to be vice-president. People accused him of receiving illegal money contributions to his campaign and some people wanted Eisenhower to pick a different vice president, but Eisenhower still kept Nixon. Nixon after the accusations made a speech saying that no matter what people accuse him of illegally receiving during the campaign, he is still going to keep one campaign gift: his dog named Checkers.\nThe Republican Party decided to keep Nixon as their vice-presidential candidate and when Eisenhower won the election, Nixon became vice-president of the United States from 1953 to 1961. During his vice-presidency, he was very busy and traveled across the world to places like South America. While he was vice president, he went to the Soviet Union and had a debate with the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev. They were both arguing that their country was better.\n1960 presidential election.\nIn the presidential election of 1960, he ran against Democrat John F. Kennedy. Kennedy was expected to win at first (because he won the first television debate against Nixon), but as Election Day came closer and closer, Nixon was catching up. In the end, Kennedy won, but it was a very close election.\n1962 California gubernatorial election.\nIn 1962, Nixon lost the election for governor of California to Pat Brown. After losing, Nixon said \"you don't have Nixon to kick around any more, because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference.\", leading many experts to say that Nixon's political career was over.\n1968 presidential election.\nIn 1968, Richard Nixon defeated Hubert Humphrey in the presidential election and became president of the United States in 1969. Although Humphrey lost the popular vote narrowly, he lost the electoral college in a landslide, carrying just fifteen states. \nPresidency, 1969\u201374.\nNixon took over the Vietnam War from Lyndon Johnson and continued it with the strategy of slowly withdrawing U.S. troops, so that the South Vietnamese troops could take over the fighting by themselves. Nixon secretly bombed many enemy targets in Cambodia and North Vietnam while bringing home the American troops, to make it easier for South Vietnam to win. When his spreading the bombing to Cambodia and Laos became known in 1970, it caused larger protests than ever in America, including at Kent State and even in Washington, DC, where more than 12,000 were arrested in May 1971 at the peak of the protests. Partly because of the amount of opposition, Nixon sped up troop withdrawal and ended the draft.\nNixon was very successful in diplomacy (relations negotiations with foreign countries). He began a policy called \"d\u00e9tente\" which reduced tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union. The two countries would get along and sign treaties that would limit the production of nuclear weapons between both sides. Nixon traveled to communist China and established a very good relationship with them. Before that, there was almost no relationship between the United States and China. It opened up the door for decades of trade in the future, which is why many items in the United States were made in China. His diplomacy with China is seen as one of his greatest accomplishments. Later, under President Carter, the U.S. broke relations with the Republic of China and recognized communist China, not Taiwan, as the legal government of China.\nAt home, Nixon put many reforms into law. He created the Environmental Protection Agency, supported anti-drug laws, supported anti-crime laws, and supported anti-discrimination laws. When inflation (meaning the value of money goes down and prices go up) was high, he ordered that prices should be frozen for 90 days. Although, he was known as a conservative Republican before he became president, while he was President, he supported some of the liberal ideas that Democrats supported. In 1974, Nixon made a speech that outlined a plan for universal health care.\nNixon was re-elected by a landslide in 1972 with most Americans approving of him, but soon after, Nixon's reputation would be destroyed and most Americans would disapprove of him. Due to a scandal called \"Watergate\" during which Nixon attempted to protect (or possibly ordered) men to burglarize the Democratic National Headquarters, Congress was going to put him on trial in a process called impeachment (to remove him from power). Nixon tried to cover up the scandal, but eventually, the Supreme Court ordered him to send his taped conversations (which included him talking about covering up Watergate) to them. Alexander Haig thought Nixon would be convicted and kicked out of office. To prevent this, Nixon resigned (quit) the Presidency in 1974.\nPost-presidency.\nNixon's second vice president, Gerald Ford, gave Nixon a pardon of any crimes Nixon committed during Watergate. Ford wanted to end the crisis as quickly as possible, because the nation faced more important problems. Many people blamed Ford for letting Nixon go free, and voted against him when he ran in the 1976 election.\nNixon's public image never fully recovered, but he still got some approval back from Republicans as he frequently defended his legacy. He remained as a consultant to later Presidents, and to other people in government and the media especially to British journalist David Frost. His memoirs are considered important readings. His work in negotiating with China in the early 1970s was praised for improving relations between his country and theirs. Nixon died of a stroke in 1994, ten months after his wife Pat died. Not being able to defend his legacy any longer, his overall approval rating fell, and most everyone today acknowledges his wrongdoings related to Watergate. The house where he was born is now part of the Richard M. Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. He was buried at the library."}
{"id": "6028", "revid": "7855685", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6028", "title": "Gerald Ford", "text": "Gerald Rudolph \"Jerry\" Ford, Jr. (born Leslie Lynch King, Jr.; July 14, 1913 \u2014 December 26, 2006) was an American politician. He was the 38th president of the United States from 1974 to 1977. Before becoming president, he was the 40th vice president from 1973 to 1974. He was also a member of the House of Representatives from 1949 to 1973, becoming its minority leader in 1965. He is the only president who has not been elected to the office of either President or Vice President. He was a Republican.\nFord was born in Omaha, Nebraska. He attended the University of Michigan and Yale Law School. After Pearl Harbor was attacked in 1941, he joined the U.S. Naval Reserve and served from 1942 to 1946. \nFord began his career in politics in 1949 as the U.S. representative from Michigan's 5th congressional district. In 1965, he became the House Minority Leader. In December 1973, he became the vice president of the United States, replacing Spiro Agnew, who had resigned two months before. This made Ford the first person to become vice president due to the 25th Amendment. In August 1974, Ford became president after Richard Nixon resigned.\nAs president, Ford signed the Helsinki Accords. It was created to ease tensions between the Western world and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. In 1975, South Vietnam collapsed. This event ended US participation in the Vietnam War. \nDomestically, Ford had to work with the worst economy since the Great Depression. There was growing inflation and a recession during his presidency. Ford also gave a presidential pardon to his predecessor, Richard Nixon, for his role in the Watergate scandal. The pardon was one of the most controversial things he did as president. Foreign policy was characterized in procedural terms by the bigger role Congress began to play, and by the restraining of the powers of the president. \nIn 1976, Ford ran for reelection. He defeated former California Governor Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination. He narrowly lost the presidential election to the Democratic candidate, former Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter. \nAfter his presidency ended in 1977, Ford remained active in the Republican Party. However, his views on some social issues caused disagreement with conservative members of the party in the 1990s and early 2000s. He is not ranked high in presidential opinion polls.\nFord died at home on December 26, 2006 after facing a series of health problems. He was 93 years old.\nEarly life.\nHe was born on July 14, 1913, at 3202 Woolworth Avenue in Omaha, Nebraska, where his parents lived with his paternal grandparents. (the parents of his father) His birth name was Leslie Lynch King, Jr. His mother was Dorothy Ayer Gardner, and his father was Leslie Lynch King, Sr., a wool trader and son of prominent banker Charles Henry King and Martha Alicia King (n\u00e9e Porter). Dorothy separated from King just sixteen days after her son's birth. She took her son with her to the Oak Park, Illinois. This was where her sister, Tannisse, and brother-in-law, Clarence Haskins James, lived. After that, she moved to the home of her parents, Levi Addison Gardner and Adele Augusta Ayer in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Dorothy and King divorced in December 1913; she got full custody of her son. Ford's paternal grandfather Charles Henry King paid child support until shortly before his death in 1930.\nFord later said his biological father had a history of hitting his mother. James M. Cannon, a member of the Ford administration, wrote in a Ford biography that the Kings' separation and divorce were sparked when, a few days after Ford's birth, Leslie King threatened Dorothy with a butcher knife and threatened to kill her, Ford, and Ford's nursemaid. Ford later told confidantes that his father had first hit his mother on their honeymoon for smiling at another man.\nAfter two and a half years with her parents, on February 1, 1916, Dorothy married Gerald Rudolff Ford, a salesman in a family-owned paint and varnish company. They then called her son \"Gerald Rudolff Ford, Jr.\" The future president was never formally adopted, however, and he did not legally change his name until December 3, 1935; he also used a more conventional spelling of his middle name. He was raised in Grand Rapids with his three half brothers from his mother's second marriage: Thomas Gardner Ford (1918\u20131995), Richard Addison Ford (born 1924), and James Francis Ford (1927\u20132001).\nFord also had three half-siblings from his father's second marriage: Marjorie King (1921\u20131993), Leslie Henry King (1923\u20131976), and Patricia Jane King (born 1925). They never saw one another as children and he did not know them at all. Ford was not aware of his biological father until he was 17, when his parents told him about the circumstances of his birth. That year his father Leslie King, whom Ford described as a \"carefree, well-to-do man who didn't really give a damn about the hopes and dreams of his firstborn son\", approached Ford while he was waiting tables in a Grand Rapids restaurant.\nFord said, \"My stepfather was a magnificent person and my mother equally wonderful. So I couldn't have written a better prescription for a superb family upbringing.\"\nScouting and athletics.\nFord was involved in The Boy Scouts of America, and earned that program's highest rank, Eagle Scout. In his later years, Ford received the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award in May 1970 and Silver Buffalo Award from the Boy Scouts of America. He is the only U.S. president who is an Eagle Scout. He played football when he was in high school and college.\nPolitical career.\nFord served 25 years in the United States House of Representatives and was Minority Leader for many years. When Richard Nixon was President, his first Vice President was Spiro Agnew, but Agnew resigned in 1973 because he took bribes while he was Governor of Maryland in the late 1960s. Nixon then chose Ford to be his next Vice President. Ford had to be approved by Congress since there was no Presidential election that year. Because he had been in Congress for a long time, other Congressmen knew him well and were happy to approve him as Vice President because they thought he was honest.\nHowever, Ford was not Nixon's first choice. Some of his first choices were John Connally (the former Governor of Texas), Nelson Rockefeller (the Governor of New York), and Ronald Reagan (the former Governor of California). But, Nixon was worried that these other men might have trouble getting approved by Congress. All of them had also run for President already or were planning to run soon. Nixon did not want to help pick who would be the top Republican candidate in 1976 and Ford promised him that he was not interested in being President. Ford always told reporters that he always dreamed of being Speaker of the House instead.\nPresidency, 1974\u201377.\nBecause of the Watergate scandal, Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974. Ford became the President. He was inaugurated at the White House by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger. He is the only President of the United States not to be elected to either the office of President or Vice President. Once he became President, he realized he could do a good job and decided to run for a full term in 1976. He ran against the popular conservative Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination in 1976. Ford won by a small number of votes against Reagan.\nIn 1975, Ford was nearly assassinated in Sacramento, California.\nFord had pardoned Nixon for his crimes in 1974. Many experts say that is one of the reasons why Ford lost to Jimmy Carter in the 1976 election, which was very close. Other reasons for the loss were a bad economy with a lot of inflation, the Mayag\u00fcez incident, and the last U.S. soldiers leaving Vietnam followed by Saigon and the rest of South Vietnam being taken over by the North Vietnamese, both in 1975.\nLegacy.\nWith his somewhat short 895-day presidency (less than one term), he was often seen as a place holder in between Richard Nixon and Jimmy Carter. The way he handled the Watergate scandal has changed people's view of him. While critics felt that pardoning Nixon was not fair, his supporters felt like his term provided a sense of healing and comfort to a country that was morally divided.\nHe was also a more liberal Republican than the more conservative Ronald Reagan.\nPersonal life.\nFord was adopted at a young age. His birth name was Leslie King, Jr. He married Betty Ford in 1948.\nDeath.\nFord died in his home in California on December 26, 2006 from cardiac arrest caused by cerebrovascular disease and coronary artery disease at the age of 93 years and 165 days. Until then, no other president had lived to be that old since Ronald Reagan in 2004. George H. W. Bush became the oldest living former president in November 2017. On March 22, 2019, Jimmy Carter gained the distinction of being the nation's longest-lived president."}
{"id": "6029", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6029", "title": "John Kerry", "text": "John Forbes Kerry (born December 11, 1943) is an American politician. He is a former United States Secretary of State and former Senator from Massachusetts and the Democratic nominee for President in 2004. He lost to George W. Bush. He has served in the Senate for 23 years and has also served as the lieutenant governor of Massachusetts under Michael Dukakis.\nIn November 2020, then President-elect Joe Biden named Kerry as the U.S. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate.\nEarly life.\nKerry was born on December 11, 1943 at Fitzsimons Army Medical Center in Aurora, Colorado. His father was an officer in the United States Army Air Force. He studied at Yale University and at Boston College Law school. Kerry was raised as a Roman Catholic by his Catholic father and Episcopalian mother.\nIt was discovered in 2003 by Felix Gundacker, a genealogist working with \"The Boston Globe\", that Kerry's paternal grandparents, who had been born Jewish, as \"Fritz Kohn\" and \"Ida L\u00f6we\", in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, changed their names to \"Frederick and Ida Kerry\" in 1900 and converted from Judaism to Roman Catholicism in 1901\nCareer.\nIn 1968 and 1969, Kerry was a United States Navy officer in Vietnam. During the 2012 Obama reelection campaign, Kerry participated in one on one debate prep with the president, impersonating the Republican candidate Mitt Romney.\nKerry's vice presidential candidate was John Edwards. The ticket lost the election to George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. One of the reasons Kerry lost is because people said he was an elitist (he did not understand most Americans) and also because a group called \"Swift Boat Veterans for Truth\" attacked his service in Vietnam.\nIn November 2006, Kerry once apologizes after saying that college students needed to study hard or else they would \"get stuck in Iraq.\"\nSecretary of State.\nOn December 21, 2012, President Barack Obama nominated Kerry to succeed Hillary Clinton as Secretary of State. The committee said yes on making Kerry the new Secretary of State. Kerry won confirmation by the Senate on January 29, 2012 by a 94-3 vote. He assumed the office of Secretary of State on February 1, 2013. \nIn a letter to Massachusetts Governor Deval Patrick, Kerry announced his resignation from the Senate effective February 1. Kerry was sworn in as Secretary of State on February 1, 2013.\nSpecial Envoy for Climate Change.\nOn November 23, 2020, President-elect Joe Biden announced that Kerry will serve as the U.S. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate in the Biden administration. He was sworn in on January 20, 2021, the same day Biden was inaugurated as president.\nPersonal life.\nHe was married to Julia from 1970 until they divorced in 1988. Then he was married to Teresa Heinz since 1995. He has two children and three step-children. He now lives in Boston, Massachusetts. Kerry and his former competitor George W. Bush share an ancestor on Kerry's mother's side and Bush's father's side from the 1600s.\nKerry is 6\u00a0ft 4 in (1.93 m) tall, enjoys surfing and windsurfing, as well as ice hockey, hunting and playing bass guitar. According to an interview he gave to \"Rolling Stone\" magazine in 2004, Kerry's favorite album is \"Abbey Road\" and he is a fan of The Beatles and The Rolling Stones, as well as of Jimi Hendrix and Jimmy Buffett. He never liked heavy metal. During his 2004 presidential campaign, Kerry used Bruce Springsteen's \"No Surrender\" as one of his campaign songs. Later he would adopt U2's \"Beautiful Day\" as his official campaign song.\nHealth.\nIn 2003, Kerry was diagnosed with and successfully treated for prostate cancer.\nOther websites.\n "}
{"id": "6033", "revid": "1073251", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6033", "title": "White blood cell", "text": "The job of white blood cells (also called \"leukocytes\") is to fight infections and cancer. They also remove poison, waste and damaged cells from the body.\nThe number of white blood cells increases when a person is fighting infection or disease and decrease when a person is healthy.\nTypes of white blood cells.\nLymphocytes.\nLymphocytes are round white blood cells a bit bigger than a red blood cell. Their center is round and they have little cytoplasm. Part of the lymphatic system, these target specific germs or poisons using their antibodies. There are three known types of lymphocytes, called T-cells, B-cells, and natural killer cells (NK cells).\nB-cells make antibodies, which are little molecules that attach to viruses or bad cells. These tell other cells to destroy the viruses or bad cells, like a flag.\nT-cells can either help make more B-cells, or kill cells with antibodies.\nNatural killer cells kill cells in the body that have been infected by a virus or that are part of a tumor. They are part of the innate immune system.\nMonocytes.\nMonocytes are reserve cells which turn into macrophages and dendritic cells, which work together in tissues to fight disease. Monocytes have a kidney bean shaped center and lots of cytoplasm. They may appear as macrophages in a non-round shape when they pass through tissue to eat germs, \"junk\" cells, and dead cells.\nGranulocytes.\nThe next three types of white blood cells are referred to as granulocytes since they all contain rough, grain-like particles that assist in attacking viruses and bacteria. Granulocytes are also called polymorphonuclear leukocytes because of the shape of the nucleus, which has three segments.\nNeutrophils.\nNeutrophils are the most abundant type of white blood cells in mammals, 70% of leukocytes. They are an essential part of the immune system. They get to the site of an injury within minutes, and make up much of the content of pus. They have a short life-span of a couple of days.\nThe nucleus, which looks like a string of beads, does not take up stain strongly. Like phagocytes, they actually eat the bacteria and dead cells. They also release a bunch of proteins which work to damage the bacteria.\nBasophils.\nBasophils, or basophil granulocytes, are rare granulocytes. If you collected 1000 white blood cells, only 13 of them would be basophils. Their nucleus is hidden by granules which turn dark blue in color when stained. Basophils carry histamine and heparin. They appear at the sites of ectoparasite infection, or allergies. We don't know exactly how they work.\nEosinophils.\nEosinophils, or \"acidophils\", are leukocytes. They are one of the immune system components which combat parasites and certain infections. As with mast cells and basophils, they part causes of allergy and asthma. Eosinophils are round cells with a lobed nucleus and granules which turn red when stained. These granules are packed with proteins that can be poured out to help destroy invaders.\nCell testing.\nA test called a differential count shows how many white blood cells there are in a person's blood, and how many of each type are there."}
{"id": "6034", "revid": "125145", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6034", "title": "Lymphocyte", "text": "Lymphocytes are a type of white blood cell (or \"leukocyte\"). They help an organism to fight infections. They occur in the immune system of all vertebrates. All lymphoctes have a large, blob-like nucleus.\nLymphocytes can be divided into three main types:\nTypes.\nNatural killer cells.\nNatural killer (NK) cells are a part of the immune system a person is born with. They protect the organism from tumours and from cells infected by viruses. Natural killer cells are made active by chemicals released by damaged cells called interferons.\nNatural killer cells can tell the difference between infected cells, tumours, and normal cells. They recognise changes in the level of a surface molecule called MHC (major histocompatibility complex) class I.\nThe NK cells then release cytotoxic (cell-killing) granules which then destroy the altered cells.\nT and B cells.\nT cells (thymus cells) and B cells (bone cells) are the main cells of the adaptive immune response. They tackle infections, and they cause the immune system to 'remember' the event.\nThe function of T cells and B cells is to recognize foreign antigens. Antigens are surface molecules on a cell. Once they have identified an invader, the cells respond to remove pathogens or pathogen-infected cells.\nB cells respond to pathogens by producing large numbers of antibodies which then destroy foreign objects like bacteria and viruses.\nSome T cells, called T helper cells, produce cytokines that direct the immune response. Cytokines signal to other immune cells that there is a foreign antigen present. Other T cells, called cytotoxic T cells, produce toxic granules which cause the death of infected cells.\nOnce they are made active, B cells and T cells produce \"memory cells\". Throughout the lifetime of an animal, these cells will 'remember' each specific pathogen encountered, and are able to make a strong response if the pathogen is detected again. Memory cells live a long time in the body, and are how vaccinations work.\nDevelopment.\nMammalian stem cells change or differentiate into several kinds of blood cell within the bone marrow. This process is called haematopoiesis (= blood growth). All lymphocytes come from a common basic lymphocyte cell before differentiating into their distinct lymphocyte types.\nB cells mature into B lymphocytes in the bone marrow, while T cells migrate to and mature in a distinct organ, called the thymus. After they mature, the lymphocytes enter the circulation and lymphoid organs (e.g. the spleen and lymph nodes) where they are able to sense invading pathogens and tumour cells.\nCharacteristics.\nIn the circulatory system they move from lymph node to lymph node. This contrasts with macrophages, which are rather stationary in the nodes.\nLymphocytes and disease.\nWhen white blood cells are counted, the lymphocyte count is the percentage of lymphocytes present.\nAn increase in lymphocyte concentration is usually a sign of a viral infection (in some rare case, leukemias are found through an abnormally high lymphocyte count in an otherwise normal person).\nA low normal to low absolute lymphocyte count is found with infections after surgery or trauma.\nHuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infects and destroys T cells. Without the key defence that these T cells provide, the body becomes prone to infections that otherwise would not affect healthy people.\nThe extent of HIV progression is found by measuring the percentage of CD4+ T cells in the patient's blood. The effects of other virus or lymphocyte disorders can also often be estimated by counting the numbers of lymphocytes present in the blood."}
{"id": "6035", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6035", "title": "Author", "text": "An author is a person who writes books, stories, poems, or other written work. Their writing can be truth or fiction, short or long. Often, \"author\" is a word for a professional writer, but any person who writes may also be called that.\nSometimes, a person who creates something that is not prose is called an author. Someone who writes music may be called the author of that piece of music, though we would usually call that person a composer. In the film world, the French word for author, \"auteur\", is often used about someone who has been both the writer and director of a movie. \nIn biology, the first person to write an article that gives a name to and describes a type of living thing is the author of that name. \nIn copyright law, the author is the first owner of copyright. Such laws also apply to other works of art such as pictures or music."}
{"id": "6037", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6037", "title": "Pedipalp", "text": "Pedipalps are the two appendages on the front of a spider's head. Some spiders seem to have ten legs and not eight, because these pedipalps look like an extra pair of legs. The pedipalps are used rather like arms. Spiders often use them to hold insects (for example crickets) for them to eat.\nMale spiders also use pedipalps for mating. The male spiders make some silk, put sperm onto the silk, and then put their pedipalps into the sperm. The pedipalps then hold the sperm, and the spider can use it to mate with a female by putting them inside her epigynum.\nDiversity of pedipalps.\nThe pedipalps of all chelicerates vary: Ricinulei, Thelyphonida, Amblypygi, some Opiliones, Schizomida, Scorpions and pseudoscorpions all have theirs as pincers, with the Amblypygi's being their entire pedipalps shaped like mantids. The Palpigradi's pedipalps have some of the strangest roles of arachnids as they use theirs for locomotion. The pedipalps of Solifugae act as antenna."}
{"id": "6039", "revid": "7849304", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6039", "title": "Ionic compound", "text": "In chemistry, an ionic compound is a compound made of ions. They have strong ionic bonds between particles. Lots of energy (heat) is required to break the bond apart, resulting in high melting and boiling points. The ions join together because they have different charges. Compounds of metals and non-metals are usually ionic. They are made when two or more atoms come close together and an electron goes from one atom to the other atom. The electron does this because both atoms want a full outer shell, similar to those of the noble gases.\nNote 1: carbon and silicon in Group 4 usually form covalent bonds by sharing electrons.\nNote 2: the elements in Group 0 do not react with other elements to form ions"}
{"id": "6045", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6045", "title": "ELISA", "text": "The ELISA method (Enzyme Linked Immuno-Sorbent Assay) is a technique used in biochemistry to determine if a certain substance--such as a specific cytokine or antigen--is present within a sample. It is sometimes abbreviated as \"EIA.\"\nThis technique uses special antibodies that attach themselves to the substance. These antibodies generate a specific color. The amount of color indicates the amount of substance present. (Sometimes, the substance must be viewed under ultraviolet light for the antibodies to generate this color.)\nAnother set of antibodies are used to \"capture\" the substance. These antibodies adhere to both the substance and the testing container, thus holding the substance in place.\nA more sophisticated and sensitive technique, the ELISPOT method, was derived from the ELISA techique."}
{"id": "6046", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6046", "title": "David Hume", "text": "David Hume (7 May 1711 \u2013 25 August 1776) was a philosopher and historian from Scotland. When he was still alive, people thought of him as a historian. He wrote a series of large books called \"The History of England\". But today, people think of Hume as an important philosopher.\nIn his books on philosophy, Hume said that many of our beliefs do not come from reason. Instead, they come from our instincts or feelings. For example, reason does not tell us that one thing causes another. Instead, we see one thing and then we see another, and we \"feel\" a link between the two. Similarly, reason does not tell us that someone is a good person. Instead, we see that the person is kind and friendly, and we \"feel\" a special moral feeling. Because Hume thought that these beliefs do not come from reason, people call him a \"skeptical\" or \"anti-rationalist\" philosopher.\nHume is famous for his 'Induction Fallacy'. This draws attention to a common mistake people make. People see something, and make claims that what they see will always be as they see it. For example, people see only white swans and claim that all swans are white. This is 'fallacious' or mistaken, because it is always possible that they then will see a black swan.\nHume was also skeptical about religion. He was not a religious person and religious people did not like his opinions. He did not believe in miracles. He said that suicide wasn't always wrong, but never said whether or not he believed in God. In 1776, when he was dying, his friends found him very calm about death, despite him not believing in an Afterlife. Today, Hume's books are very important to philosophers who are interested in religion.\nToday's philosophers sometimes use the term 'Hume's fork' to refer to Hume calling everything we can think about either a relation of ideas (things like mathematics, that must be true) or a matter of fact (like science, where we have to look at things to tell whether or not they are true).\nAnother philosopher, Immanuel Kant, read some of Hume's books and changed his mind about some important things. Kant said Hume had made him wake up from a sleeping dogmatism, the traditional metaphysics.\nHere are Hume's most important books:"}
{"id": "6050", "revid": "508885", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6050", "title": "Bath", "text": "A bath (UK English) or bathtub (US English) is a basin large enough for people sit in when washing their body. The bath is usually in the bathroom. A less common name for a bath is a \"washtub\".\nSometimes people will add scents, oils and salts to the bath for better experience.\nA bath is also a place where people can sit in water (or other liquids, often hot) for their health. This is where the town name Bath comes from. Public baths for relaxing were built in all parts of the Roman Empire."}
{"id": "6056", "revid": "6979591", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6056", "title": "TV", "text": ""}
{"id": "6057", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6057", "title": "Brush", "text": "A brush is a tool with bristles or wires or other filaments sticking out. There are many kinds. Most brushes have a long part at one end to hold (the handle), on the other end from the head that carries the bristles or filaments. We use brushes for cleaning, making hair look good, painting, and other purposes.\nBrushes for cleaning.\nMany kinds of brushes are made for cleaning, for example toothbrushes or brushes for cleaning floors.\nPaint brushes.\nWe use paint brushes for putting ink or paint on paper. If a brush is dipped 1/3 to 1/4 of it\u2019s length into a can of paint, a good brush will ideally pick up the perfect amount of paint and spread it on a surface in a film that is smooth and uniform and absent of any drips, dips, or brush marks. Paint brushes typically come in two forms, synthetic, and natural. Synthetic brushes are usually made from products such as nylon, while natural refers to bristles from an animal source. Computer graphics uses digital paintbrushes for making pictures.\nPaint brushes can have three shapes:\nSizes and materials.\nWe can buy brushes in different sizes and materials. Here are some sorts.\nDecorators' brushes.\nThe sizes of brushes used for painting and decorating (changing the colour or look of a room) are usually in millimeters or inches. This shows how wide the head is. \nHere are some sizes:\nWe can buy brushes with natural or synthetic (man-made) bristles. Handles (the part of the brush we hold) may be wood or plastic.\nArtists' brushes.\nArtists' brushes usually have sizes with numbers, but there is no standard.\nFrom smallest to largest, the sizes are: \nWe use sizes \"000\" to \"20\" most often.\nBristles may be natural -- either soft hair or hog (pig) bristle -- or synthetic (man-made).\nArtists' brush handles (the part of the brush we hold) are often wooden, but the cheapest brushes may have plastic handles. Many cheap handles are made of unfinished wood; better quality handles are of finished wood."}
{"id": "6068", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6068", "title": "Starch", "text": "Starch is a complex carbohydrate. It is made of many glucose units joined by chemical bonds. This polysaccharide is produced by most green plants as an energy store. It is the most common carbohydrate in human diets. Pasta, potatoes, bread, and other starchy foods are made out of carbohydrates. \nStarch in every day activities..\nStarch in food.\nSome good food sources of starch are cereals, bread, potatoes, grains, peas, and beans. Starch is also used for thickening sauces in cooking and thickening cold foods during a preheat. Starch is a white powder that is tasteless and odourless. Corn starch or cornflour is known as a popular kind of starch made from corn.\nFoods with a lot of starch produce more energy than other foods. However, if this energy is not used, it is turned into fat by the liver through de novo lipogenesis.\nLaundry starch.\nThere are also different kinds of starch, like laundry starch, which gives clothing a smooth and crisp feel. Sweat and dirt from a person\u2019s wrist and neck will stick to the starch on the clothes, not to the fibers of the clothes, and will wash away along with the starch. Then, after each laundry load, the starch can be used again.\nOther facts.\nStarch glues are used in wood, cotton, and bonding of paper. Animals and humans have amylase, so they can digest starch.\nStarch was used in Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries to stiffen the collars and ruffs of the fine linen which surrounded the neck. Starch also requires heat to thicken. The actual temperature depends on the type of starch."}
{"id": "6070", "revid": "7820926", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6070", "title": "Thomas Hobbes", "text": "Thomas Hobbes (5 April 1588 \u2013 4 December 1679) was a philosopher from England. His most famous book is \"Leviathan\" (1651).\nWritings.\nHobbes mainly wrote about government and law\u2014he was a political philosopher. He tried to show that the best kind of government has one in which society was organised under one authority. All individuals in that society give up some rights for the sake of protection. There is no doctrine of \"separation of powers\" in Hobbes's discussion. According to him, the sovereign power must control civil, military, judicial, and ecclesiastical powers.\nStudies.\nLooking at human nature, we will see that humans are very selfish and that we are willing to hurt each other if we think it will help us. Naturally, humans are all equal because we are all strong enough to kill each other\u2014even a child can kill a strong man while he sleeps. Imagine what things would be like without a government. It would be terrible\u2014a \"state of war\". There would not be enough stuff for everyone, and people would disagree about who got what. Some people would fight each other, and everyone else would be very worried about their own safety. No one would be able to trust anyone else or make plans for the future. Life would be \"solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short\" (people would be alone, poor, mean, and would not live for long). Next, Hobbes argues that it would be a good idea for everyone to stop fighting and choose a Sovereign which could be one man or an assembly of men. Everyone should agree to obey the Sovereign, and give him all power of coercion or force of restraint under law. Once the Sovereign is in place, everyone has to obey him, even those who disagree with him. This is because everyone already agreed to obey him no matter what. Hobbes says it's better to be mostly safe under an all-powerful Sovereign, than to be in a state of war.\nHobbes wanted his argument to be like math, with each step leading to the next. However, many people disagreed with his argument. Some said that Hobbes was in favor of rebellion, because he said that people were naturally equal. Others said that humans are not as selfish as Hobbes thought. Today, most people do not like the idea of an all-powerful government. Nevertheless, Hobbes's argument was a very important one, and philosophers who are interested in government or political theory still study Hobbes's books very carefully."}
{"id": "6071", "revid": "20469", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6071", "title": "Bath (city)", "text": ""}
{"id": "6075", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6075", "title": "Trevi", "text": "Trevi (Latin: Trebiae), an old town and comune of Italy, in the province of Perugia in east central Umbria, 42\u00b053N 12\u00b045E, at 424\u00a0meters (1391\u00a0ft) above sea-level on the lower part of Mt. Serano above the wide plain of the Clitunno river. It is 10\u00a0km (6\u00a0mi) S.S.E. of Foligno and 20\u00a0km (12\u00a0mi) N. of Spoleto. The 2003 count of people by the government said that there were 7800 people living in the \"comune\": about half of the people live in the town and the other people live in the country near town. The \"frazioni\" of Trevi (the smaller towns that belong to Trevi) are Borgo, Bovara, Cannaiola, Coste, Pigge, Manciano, Matigge, Parrano, Picciche, S.\u00a0Lorenzo, S.\u00a0Maria in Valle.\nMost of the town is densely built with many buildings predating the 18th century. It crowns a summit and when one is in the centre the streets are mostly gently sloping. From the town one can see one of the best views in Umbria, over 50\u00a0km (30\u00a0mi) to the west and on clear days as far as Perugia to the north and even Monte Amiata in southern Tuscany. On the main train route from Rome to Ancona there is a station at the botton of Monte Serano servicing Trevi but the rapid Intercity services do not stop. The train service from Florence to Rome by way of Perugia also stops there: Local bus connections are not frequent. Trevi is a pleasant place to visit and of recent accommodation and good eating has become available; there are few restaurants, but they are good and more numerous than in other nearby small towns. \nHistory.\nIn Roman times, Pliny the Elder said Trevi was a city of the old Umbrians, and an old stone with Umbrian writing was found in the comune, at Bovara, in the 1950s. \"Treviae\" is also listed in the 5th\u2011century Bordeaux Itinerary. We do not know the history of Trevi in very old times, although some walls in the center part of the town on the hill are as old as the 1st century BC. Trevi started to spread out away from the hill during the time of the Empire, when Hadrian fixed the main road in the area, the Via Flaminia; this made a small town in the plain grow, at a place now called Pietrarossa. For hundreds of years people have been finding old things there: there were Roman baths that people were probably using in the time of St. Francis, who came here and told people to bathe in them.\nIn old times people say that Trevi ruled the valley below it, all the way to the Colli Martani, the line of mountains that run down the middle of Umbria. Trevi had a bishop until the 11th century, and was an important place belonging to the Lombards (in Italian, a \"gastaldato\"). At the beginning of the 13th century, Trevi made itself independent and became a free commune. It often fought on the side of Perugia to defend itself against nearby Spoleto, and fought wars with other communes in the area, winning some and losing some. It was invaded by Spoleto in the 14th century and by the Trinci, rulers of Foligno. In 1438 Trevi became part of the lands belonging to the Church as part of the \"legation\" of Perugia: after that Trevi's history was as part of the States of the Church, then (1860) of the united Kingdom of Italy.\nTrevi was at its most prosperous in the 15th century: the town was so important for those who wanted to buy and sell that people called it \"il porto secco\" \u2014 the dry port. In 1470, with Foligno, Trevi became the fourth town in Italy to have a printing press, managed by the first known printing company. Many big renaissance palazzi of the town indicate the contemporaneous prosperity.\nImportant old buildings.\nTrevi is inside two walls of the Middle Ages; at the end of the 20th century, people found that the inside walls were Roman.\nTrevi has about twenty old churches, some of which are interesting:\nThe country area around the town has many Romanesque churches: some of those on the plain were built on the Roman Via Flaminia and indicate the road's former route. Some of the stone in these churches is old Roman and derives from buildings long gone.\nMuseums.\nTrevi's big museum is the Museo S.\u00a0Francesco, next to the Gothic church S.\u00a0Francesco, which is not used for worship any more. It has a few Roman stones, but mostly many Umbrian paintings from the late Middle Ages to the 17th\u00a0century: the best painting once was part of an altar, and it is by Lo\u00a0Spagna. There is a very interesting group of \"ex\u2011votos\" (paintings to thank God for saving a person from a sickness or an accident) painted by ordinary people, not famous artists, of the 16th\u2011 century to the 18th\u2011century.\nThe Museo della Civilt\u00e0 dell'\u00a0Olivo demonstrates the local olive culture: how they are planted, how they grow, and how they are made into oil. The Flash Art Museum is dedicated to contemporary art and is the seat of an international art magazine.\nBooks to learn more about Trevi.\nThe oldest big book on the history of Trevi is \"Historia universale dello Stato temporale ed ecclesiastico di Trevi\", 1233 pages, by Durastante Natalucci, Trevi, 1745. It was translated into a more modern and readable Italian by Carlo Zenobi, a local historian, between 1987 and 1994.\nAn important book for the plain below Trevi is \"Cannaiola, Memorie storiche raccolte negli anni 1873\u201174\" by Father (now the Blessed) Pietro Bonilli.\nPro Trevi, the town's volunteer tourism office, has helped people write and print new books about the history, plants and animals of Trevi and the country nearby."}
{"id": "6077", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6077", "title": "Nicomachus", "text": "Nicomachos or Nicomachus is a Greek name. It can mean:"}
{"id": "6078", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6078", "title": "Logo", "text": "A logo is a picture or drawing that is used by a person, group, or company to mark who they are. A wordmark, or 'logotype', is a logo made entirely of a word or words. It is usually the name of a product or organisation.\nA company or group can use a 'logo' on the things that they make, like on the things they sell, on letters, and in advertisements. When a person sees the logo picture, that person knows that the thing they see the logo on came from that company.\nLogos can have letters and words in them. Many logos have the name of the company or group in them.\nMost logos are very simple drawings with only a small number of colors. Some logos are only in black and white.\nIn many countries, companies and groups should tell their country's government about the logo they are using. If they do this, the government can help stop a different company or group from using the same logo, so that every one can be sure that the logo is only used by the people who used it first. This is sometimes called a 'trade mark'.\nLogos are not used only by companies. Many schools have logos. Some cities have logos. Clubs can have logos. Even people can have their own logos if they want. The heraldic badge is probably the oldest form of logo in the world."}
{"id": "6079", "revid": "1144263", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6079", "title": "Picture", "text": "A picture, also called an image, is a group of coloured points on a flat surface that looks the same as something else. For example, a picture can look the same as an object or a person. Pictures can also be drawings, paintings or photographs. People who make such pictures are called artists, photographers or painters. Pictures are very helpful. Sometimes people say pictures are worth a thousand words. Pictures and diagrams can be used to explain how to do things, and thus a picture is a kind of tool. A moment captured in an image.\nAn image is something that can be seen, but it is not physically there. It can be a photograph, a painting, or a picture on a television or computer screen. A lens can make an image of an object appear somewhere else. Cameras use this to make the image that becomes a photograph.\nMaking Pictures.\nMost pictures today are 'photographs'. Photographs are made with cameras. A camera makes a picture that looks very real.\nWhen there were no cameras, people made pictures by using paint, brushes, pencils, crayons, pens, and other things that people can write or draw with. Pictures made with paint and brush are called 'paintings'. Before cameras, some artists were able to make very real looking pictures with just paint. Sometimes pictures made with pencil or pen are called 'sketches', if they are made quickly and only look a little bit like the real thing.\nUsually pictures are put on paper. Pictures made with paint are usually put on a strong, rough fabric called 'canvas'. Sometimes pictures can be put on walls or other things, even glass.\nSome places, such as churches have pictures on windows made out of colored pieces of glass. These are called \"stained glass\".\nSpecial types of Pictures.\nIf people take a lot of pictures, and show them one at a time, very fast, they can make a picture that looks like it is moving. This is called a \"moving picture\", or a movie. A television shows people a moving picture by using light. \nA slide show is a series of pictures arranged to tell a story, for example to illustrate a narrative. \nA projector shines light from a light bulb through a kind of transparent picture. When light shines through this kind of picture onto a screen or another flat place, the picture can be seen on that flat place. This is often used to show movies and slide shows to an audience.\nSome people make pictures that do not look flat, by taking two regular flat pictures at the same time. People have to move their eyes in a special way or use a stereoscope so they can see both pictures together. When they look at the pictures using their binocular vision correctly, the picture does not look flat. This is called '3D' or 'three dimensional'.\nCutaway pictures show what is inside of something, that cannot actually be seen."}
{"id": "6081", "revid": "1136368", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6081", "title": "Building", "text": "Building may be a noun or a verb. Building is one of the most ancient human skills. It is part of how we have survived and it is the clearest symbol of every civilization. Although some other animals build simple structures, e.g. birds, ants and bees, humans have learned to build in a great many different ways to suit different needs and local conditions. We build mostly for shelter. Buildings can shelter people, or animals, or machinery, or anything. The simplest building is just a roof to keep the space beneath dry, or shady. Adding walls gives more shelter, from the wind or rain. It also gives security. \nBy putting a window in a wall with or without glass, we let light inside the building. We leave a hole somewhere big enough to go in and out, with a door which can be opened and closed. Often the door will have a lock so the building can be left secure.\nIf a building is to last for a long time, it must have a solid foundation. This foundation is like the root of a tree, which is sunk a bit deep into the ground and supports the walls. If the ground is soft, the foundation must be very deep and strong so that the building can have a strong contact with the ground. \nIf a building is high enough, it can have more than one floor. People can climb from one floor to the next by a staircase, or perhaps by a lift or elevator. This is known as going upstairs, or downstairs. Buildings can also have a floor under the ground. This is usually called a cellar or basement.\nBuildings can be beautiful or ugly, exciting or boring. Architects are people trained to design buildings. Their work is called architecture and it can be an art form. Look at the building where you are reading this. Look at the shapes and shadows. Is there enough light? Do some rooms make you feel like staying in them while others make you want to hurry away? Do they have interesting features? Think about how you could have made the building better. Almost anybody can become an architect if they want to. But only a good architect or a good builder can design or build a beautiful building.\nTypes of buildings.\nShelters are places to live (residential buildings). We also build places to work and to make things, places to store things, places to sell things, places where sick people can go to be treated, places to put people who break our laws. We build to do many things. \nSome buildings are meeting places. A large number of people can gather at a temple or theater or stadium to worship god or to hear or see what other people say or do. In Christendom they are called churches. Until we began to build skyscrapers, religious buildings were usually the largest, tallest buildings in a town. Fortresses and castles were also big but usually were not in town. Big buildings require much work to make, thus can symbolize power. They impress and they give a focus to cities.\nBuildings are made of various materials. Where wood is plentiful, it is much used. Many very old buildings of stone exist. Concrete is used almost everywhere. Starting in the late 19th century, skyscrapers were made of steel, increasingly combined with glass. "}
{"id": "6082", "revid": "805023", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6082", "title": "Candle", "text": "A candle is a stick made of wax with a string (a thin piece of rope) straight in the middle. If someone puts the string on fire, the flame burns slowly but for a long time.\nFire can burn string very fast. But in a candle, the string does not burn fast, because the fire melts the wax instead. The wax sometimes drips down the side of the candle. When the melted wax is far from the flame, it gets hard again, and can be used again in a new candle. \nThe flame is very hot, since it is a very small, real fire. The light blue part of the flame can be as hot as . It can still burn people and things. If the fire spreads, it can grow into a very big fire and even burn down a house or building. \nIf the flame is kept on the candle long enough, the candle will slowly get shorter and shorter until it is gone. The fire on a candle can be put out by blowing air on it. There is also a special tool called a \"candle snuffer\" that covers the fire with a small metal cup and puts it out. Today, candle snuffers are usually only used in churches or in places where candles are up very high. Stopping the fire stops the candle from burning until it is all gone.\nBefore light bulbs, candles were used so people could see at night. Some people still use candles today when electricity is down, or because they like the little amount of light that candles make. Some people also like candles because they look nice, or because they smell nice. A special kind of candle called \"citronella\" can help keep bugs away."}
{"id": "6085", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6085", "title": "Salamander", "text": "Salamanders are amphibians. They are the order Caudata (or Urodela). There are about 500 different species.\nSalamanders live in water and on land, and look rather like lizards, with four legs and a tail. They hatch as larvae from eggs in the water. At that stage, they have gills that stick out.\nMost salamanders live on land when they are adults, after their change of shape (metamorphosis). On land, salamanders live in moist habitats. Their method of respiration varies. Some salamanders stay in the water, but look like adults. These are called newts. Some salamanders retain gills into sexual maturity, such as the Axolotl. This process is called neoteny.\nOften, salamanders may have a chemical defence to predators; they are poisonous to eat. In this case, they will have warning colouration. Otherwise, if not poisonous, they will usually have camouflage.\nSalamanders are the only tetrapods able to regenerate limbs, as well as other body parts.\nFeatures.\nRespiration differs between species of salamanders. Species that lack lungs respire through gills. In most cases, these are external gills, visible as tufts on either side of the head, although the amphiumas have internal gills and gill slits. Some salamanders that are terrestrial have lungs that are used in respiration, although these are simple and sac-like, unlike the more complex organs found in mammals. Many species, such as the Olm, have both lungs and gills as adults.\nSome terrestrial species lack both lungs and gills and perform gas exchange through their skin, a process known as valerian respiration in which the capillary beds are spread throughout the epidermis, and inside the mouth. Even some species with lungs can also respire through the skin in this manner.\nThe skin of salamanders secretes mucus. This helps to keep the animal moist when on dry land, and maintains their salt balance while in water, as well as providing a lubricant during swimming. Salamanders also secrete poison from glands in their skin, and some additionally have skin glands for secreting courtship pheromones.\nHunting is yet another unique aspect of salamanders. In the lungless salamanders, muscles surrounding the hyoid bone contract to create pressure and actually \"shoot\" the hyoid bone out of the mouth along with the tongue. The tip of the tongue is composed of a mucus which creates a sticky end to which the prey is captured. Muscles in the pelvic region are used in order to reel the tongue and the hyoid back to its original position.\nMany of the highly aquatic species, however, have no muscles in the tongue, and do not use it for capturing prey, while most other species have a mobile tongue, but without the adaptations to the hyoid bone. Most species of salamander have small teeth in both the upper and lower jaws. Unlike frogs, even the larvae of salamanders possess these teeth.\nTo find their prey, salamanders use trichromatic color vision in the ultraviolet range. Permanently subterranean salamanders have reduced eyes, which may even be covered by a layer of skin. The larvae, and the adults of some highly aquatic species, also have a lateral line organ, similar to that of fish, which can detect changes in water pressure. Salamanders have no external ear, and only a vestigial middle ear.\nSalamanders can drop their tail to escape predators. The tail will drop off and wriggle around for a little while, and the salamanders will either run away or stay still enough to not be noticed while the predator is distracted. Salamanders routinely regenerate complex tissues. Within only a few weeks of losing a piece of limb, a salamander perfectly reforms the missing structure.\nClassification.\nThere are ten families in the order Urodela, divided into three suborders:"}
{"id": "6086", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6086", "title": "Newt", "text": "Newts or \"efts\" are small amphibia. They are in a subfamily of the salamanders. They are found in North America, Europe, and North Asia.\nLife cycle.\nFemales lay eggs and leave them. Tadpoles are born from those eggs.\nNewts have three life stages. First as a tiny aquatic larva, which gradually undergoes metamorphosis. Then they leave the water for a year as a juvenile called an \"eft\". They go back in the water to breed as adults.\nIn some species the adults stay in water for the rest of their lives. Others are land-based, but return to water each year to breed.\nDefences.\nMany newts produce toxins in their skin secretions as a defence against predators. They have bright skin colours as a warning to other animals.\n\"Taricha\" newts of western North America are particularly toxic; the rough-skinned newt \"Taricha granulosa\" of the Pacific Northwest produces more than enough tetrodotoxin to kill an adult human. Recently, a 29-year-old man in Coos Bay, Oregon, who had been drinking heavily, swallowed a rough-skin newt for a dare; he died later that day despite hospital treatment.\nMost newts can be safely handled, provided that the toxins they produce are not ingested or allowed to come in contact with mucous membranes, or breaks in the skin. After handling, proper hand-washing techniques should be followed due to the risk from the toxins they produce and bacteria they carry, such as salmonella. It is illegal to handle or disturb great crested newts in the UK without a licence.\nAre newts a related group?\nThe term \"newt\" has traditionally been used as a functional term for salamanders living in water, and not a systematic unit. The relationship between the genera has been uncertain, though they may be a natural systematic unit. Newer molecular analysis tend to suggest they actually do form a clade.\nNewts only appear in one subfamily of salamanders, the Pleurodelinae (of the family Salamandridae).\nSome genera occasionally listed as Pleurodelinae are not newts (\"Salamandrina\" and \"Euproctus\")."}
{"id": "6087", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6087", "title": "Poison", "text": "Poisons are substances which cause death or injury when taken in by a living thing. It may be taken in as drink or food, or absorbed through the skin. The damage is usually done by a chemical reaction. The effect of the poison varies with the amount which is absorbed (taken in or inhaled). Substances which are poisonous are called toxic, but any substance can be toxic if too much of it is consumed. If poisoning causes death, it is \"lethal\" poison.\nLegally, and in hazardous chemical labeling, poisons are especially toxic substances. Less toxic substances are labeled \"harmful\", \"irritant\", or not labeled at all.\nIn medicine and zoology, toxins and venoms are different from poisons. Toxins are the result of a biological process. Venoms are substances which the organism uses to harm other species. Certain organisms use venoms for hunting, or as a defense. If an organism is \"poisonous\", such as many mushrooms, it is harmful to eat. If it is \"venomous\", like snakes or honeybees, it has a harmful bite or sting. For some very deadly bites humans have developed effective antivenoms. \nOften it is only the quantity of a substance that makes the difference. Drinking alcoholic drinks may lead to aggressive behaviour, problems with speech, and different forms of amnesia. This effect is called intoxication. People who drink even more may go into shock. At the same time, alcohol can be used as a disinfectant.\nSometimes, poisons have an antidote. The antidote of a poison will slow or reverse its effects. The antidote may itself be a poison. As an example, atropine can be used as an antidote against certain nerve gases, like tabun or sarin, or against certain insecticides. It is also used as a medication. In high doses, atropine is a poison. Yet atropine is a \"core\" medicine in the World Health Organization's \"essential drugs list\".\nThere are other types of dangerous materials. These are:\nPollution is also sometimes poisonous, for example toxic waste.\nPoison gas.\nIn wars, some countries use poison gases against their enemies. This is called chemical warfare.\nPoison gases such as chlorine gas and mustard gas were used in World War I. In World War II, the Nazis used a form of hydrogen cyanide gas to kill many people in their death camps and concentration camps.\nPoison gas has also been used to intentionally kill humans as method of death penalty.\nBeing poisoned by gas sometimes happens accidentally. For example, a faulty furnace or heating system can cause carbon monoxide poisoning.\nThere are many types of poison gases. For example, corrosive poison gases cause serious burns to the skin, eyes, and lungs. Nerve agents are poisons that can kill by damaging the central nervous system. Blister agents cause severe blisters on the inside and the outside of the body. Choking agents make fluid build up in a person's lungs until they drown.\nDeaths.\nIn 2010, poisoning resulted in about 180,000 deaths, down from 200,000 in 1990. There were approximately 727,500 emergency department visits in the United States involving poisonings\u20143.3% of all injury-related encounters."}
{"id": "6088", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6088", "title": "Powder", "text": "Powder is very small, dry pieces or grains. When we press some dry solids very hard, or when we cut something up into lots of small pieces, we can sometimes make powder. \nFor example, people sometimes put \"face powder\" on their faces, when they want to look good. Sometimes sports players put powder on their hands, to make them dry. We put \"curry powder\" in our food, to make it taste stronger. We put \"washing powder\" in the washing machine when we want to have clean clothes. People use \"gunpowder\" to make bombs and fireworks.\n\"Powder\" is also a verb - meaning to apply powder."}
{"id": "6089", "revid": "7598106", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6089", "title": "Larva", "text": "Many animals develop in separate stages. A larva (plural: \"larvae\") develops from the egg in those animals. It is a separate life stage from the adult reproductive stage. A larva does not look like the adult animal, and changes shape (known as metamorphosis) as it grows up. There may be several larval stages before the adult form. Tadpoles, maggots and caterpillars are larvae.\nMarine organisms with a larval stage often release large numbers of eggs and sperms into the water column. After fertilisation, the eggs develop into tiny larvae. The larvae develop and grow for some time before metamorphosing into adults. Most marine invertebrates and many fish have a pelagic larval stage or pelagic eggs. These live in the plankton, and may be transported long distances.\nEvolutionary theory.\nProbably the most widely accepted theory explaining the evolution of larval stages is the need for \"dispersal\". Sessile organisms such as barnacles and tunicates, and sea-floor groups like mussels and crabs, need some way to move their young into new territory, since they cannot move long distances as adults. Many species have relatively long pelagic larval stages (how long a larva is in the water column). During this time, larvae feed and grow, and many species move through several stages of development. For example, most barnacles moult through six \"nauplius\" larva stages before moulting to a \"cipris\", when they look to settle. The larvae eat different food from the adults, and disperse.\nThe other consideration is the small size of the eggs. If animals lay many small eggs (and most do), then the young stages cannot live the life the adults lead. They must live a separate life until they have the size and capability to live as an adult. This is what the larvae do.\nOrigin of vertebrates.\nA long-standing theory is that in transformed larvae of sea-squirts (tunicates) lies the origin of vertebrates. Tunicates are sessile, but their larvae are mobile, and have some features found in early vertebrates. The process of paedomorphosis, where juvenile features are retained in the adult, is the proposed mechanism. Genome analysis does show that the tunicates are the closest living relatives of vertebrates."}
{"id": "6090", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6090", "title": "Amphibian", "text": "Amphibians are members of the class Amphibia. The living ones are frogs (including toads), salamanders (including newts) and caecilians. They are four-legged vertebrates which are cold blooded.\nAmphibians lay their eggs in water, usually in a foam nest. After hatching they are tadpoles, which live in the water and have gills. The tadpoles change into adults in a process called metamorphosis. When they are adult, they have lungs to breathe instead of gills, and legs. Adult amphibians also use their skin to take in oxygen, and some species of salamanders do not have lungs.\nThe earliest amphibians evolved in the Devonian from lobe-finned fish which had jointed leg-like fins with digits. They could crawl along the sea bottom. Some had developed primitive lungs to help them breathe air when the stagnant pools of the Devonian swamps were low in oxygen. They could also use their strong fins to hoist themselves out of the water and onto dry land if necessary.\nFor tens of millions of years, during the Carboniferous and early Permian, amphibia were top predators on land, especially in the low-lying tropical river systems. In drier conditions, they were less effective, and the ancestors of mammals and reptiles (the Synapsids and Sauropsids) gradually took over the land. They laid cleidoic eggs, which had hard shells, and could be laid out of water. Most of the early large amphibians went extinct in the Triassic period; a few survived to the Lower Cretaceous.\nThe only living amphibiana today are the Lissamphibia. These include the Anura (frogs and toads), Caudata (salamanders and newts) and Gymnophiona (caecilians). They are all rather small, compared with mammals or reptiles. The smallest frog and vertebrate in the world is the New Guinea frog (\"Paedophryne amauensis\"). The biggest amphibian is the Chinese giant salamander (\"Andrias davidianus\").\nAmphibia are found everywhere in the world, except Antarctica, and there are about 5,565 different species: 88% of them are in the Anura. In number of species, they are more successful than mammals, though they occupy a smaller range of habitats. However, it is said that amphibian populations have been declining all over the world. Conservation is therefore an important concern.\nLiving amphibia.\nAdaptations.\nRespiration.\nAmphibians like to live near freshwater in warm weather. There have also been species which live in forests, deserts and arctic conditions. Adult amphibians use lungs, and they also get oxygen through their skin, so long as it is moist.\nDefences.\nAmphibians may be camouflaged in brown and green, and if so they are prey for birds and reptiles. Their colour gives them camouflage, which is their main defence.\nAlternatively, many other amphibia have toxic skin, which is harmful to predators. These are poisonous to eat. This is an important defence against predation. Connected to this is the use of warning colouration. They may be in vivid colours of red, black, and yellow. Research into the rough-skinned newt and the garter snake shows this is a typical case of co-evolution. Where they live in the same area, the newts get more poisonous, and the snakes develop more resistance to the poison.\nSight.\nAmphibians have colour vision and depth of focus for clear sight. They also have eyelids, glands and ducts which keep the eyes moist. These are adaptations to life on land: amphibia were the first vertebrates to have these features.\nDevelopment.\nSome amphibians, such as the common coqu\u00ed, lay eggs out of water (in this case, on palm leaves). The eggs develop directly into adult frogs, by-passing the tadpole stage. Others, like mudpuppies and olms, have a different development. In a process called neoteny, they become sexually developed as tadpoles, and continue to live in the water with gills.\nAnura.\nThe order Anura includes the frogs and toads. There is no fundamental difference between frogs and toads. Frogs have a short body, webbed digits (fingers or toes), protruding eyes, forked tongue and no tail. They are exceptional jumpers: many of their features, particularly their long, powerful legs, are adaptations to improve jumping performance. They often live in semi-aquatic or inhabit humid areas.\nA popular distinction is often made between frogs and toads on the basis of their appearance. Toads' warty skin is an adaptation for making their toxic slime. Apart from these glands, their skin is dry, and that is an adaptation to drier habitats. These features have evolved a number of times independently: convergent evolution. The distinction has no taxonomic basis. The only family exclusively given the common name \"toad\" is Bufonidae (the \"true toads\"), but many species from other families are commonly called \"toads\".\nCaudata.\nThe order Caudata is the salamanders.\nNewts are salamanders which spend their life in the water even though they are adults. They are classified in the subfamily Pleurodelinae of the family Salamandridae.\nRespiration differs between species of salamanders. Species that lack lungs respire through gills. In most cases, these are external gills, visible as tufts on either side of the head. Some salamanders that are terrestrial have lungs that are used in respiration, although these are simple and sac-like, unlike the more complex organs found in mammals. Many species, such as the Olm, have both lungs and gills as adults.\nSome terrestrial species lack both lungs and gills and perform gas exchange through their skin. Even some species with lungs also respire through the skin in this manner.\nThe skin of salamanders secretes mucus. This helps to keep the animal moist when on dry land, keeps their salt balance while in water, and lubricates during swimming. Salamanders also secrete poison from glands in their skin, and some additionally have skin glands for secreting courtship pheromones.\nAxolotls, from the genus \"Ambystoma\" (or mole salamanders), are neotenic amphibians. This means they get to sexual maturity and reproduce while still in a larval form.\nDefence mechanisms.\nMost salamanders and newts have some defence against predators, usually a poison which makes them uneatable. Their bright colours are warning colouration. If, instead, they are camouflaged, this means they are probably not protected by a toxin.\nThe second line of defence is to shed their tail, which can grow again. The tail wriggles a bit, attracts the predator while the business part of the salamander moves off.\nOther characteristics.\nThere are over 350 lungless salamanders. Most of them are terrestrial and are active in daytime. Lungless salamanders may communicate with their nose.p168 Slender salamanders are found in the Pacific Coast. They are sometimes called \"worm salamanders\". This is because they have slimmer (skinny) bodies than most salamanders.p182 If touched, slender salamanders will bounce on the ground and then run away.\nGymnophiona.\nThe order Gymnophiona includes the caecilians. These are long, cylindrical, limbless animals that look like snakes or worms. Their skin has circular folds, increasing their similarity to the segments of earthworms. Some are aquatic, but most live underground in burrows they hollow out. Many caecilians give birth to live young. In species which lay eggs, the eggs may undergo metamorphosis before they hatch. Caecilians are found in tropical Africa, Asia and Central and South America. There are 171 different species.\nTheir skins make a mucus that makes them slippery enough to slip through the earth. They can make a toxic material in their skins, as many frogs and toads do.\nReproduction.\nAmphibians are the only vertebrates to go through metamorphosis. This means that their young look different from their adult.p8 Amphibians usually reproduce in early spring to late summer, though some reproduce in winter and fall.p156 Most frogs and toads, such as the common frog (\"Rana temporalis\"), gather in large groups to ponds, rivers, swamps and lakes to breed.p10 Male frogs and toads may croak to attract a female. When a female frog has chosen a mate, the male frog hops on top of her. They swim together as she lay eggs in the water. Sometimes, males fight to mate with a female.p7 Frogs can lay up to 100 to 60,000 eggs in one clutch. This is called \"frogspawn\".\nIt is a fundamental feature of amphibia that their reproduction is, one way or another, tied to water. This is because their eggs, although covered by jelly, cannot survive long in dry conditions.\nEggs.\nMost female amphibians lays her eggs in water. Males release sperm to fertilize them. The eggs are laid one by one or in batches. Batches of eggs can look like a long chain or a ball of foam. They may wrap their eggs around plants in the water. They do this so their eggs will not drift away.p8\nTree frogs usually lay their eggs on a leaf in a rainwater pool. Bullfrogs, such as the male American bullfrog and the male African bullfrog, stay with their tadpoles and protect them from predators. They also move their tadpoles by using their nose to dig a channel to another place where there is more water.p9 They do this so their tadpoles do not dry up. Most amphibians leave their eggs to look after themselves. Fish and other animals eat most of their eggs. Male midwife toads carry their eggs on their backs. When they are ready to hatch, the toad goes back to the water and release them.p10\nTadpoles.\nTadpoles do not have lungs when they hatch and instead have gills. Because gills have a large surface area, tadpoles can get more oxygen by using them. Young tadpoles have their gills exposed. When they get older, their gills are covered over by skin.p6 When they hatch, tadpoles eat constantly. The tadpoles eat what is left of their eggs, this is usually their first food.p8\nFrog, toad and newt tadpoles eat plants such as algae and pondweed or filter feed. When they get older, they may start to feed on tiny animals in the water. Salamander tadpoles and surinam horned toad tadpoles are carnivorous throughout their tadpole stage.p9 Surinam horned toad tadpoles are very aggressive. They eat other tadpoles if food is nowhere to be found. The eggs of the spadefoot toad hatches in three days. Their tadpoles complete their metamorphosis in six to eight days. This is because spadefoot toads lay their eggs in places where water will dry up soon.p13\nTadpoles of frogs and toads start to grow their back legs first. They then grow front legs a few weeks later. When tadpoles grow their limbs they are called \"froglets\". This is because they look rather like a smaller version of adult frogs and toads. Tadpoles will also start to grow a backbone after growing their front limbs. After this, their mouths get bigger and their eyes will stick out more. After a tadpole has grown its hands, their tails continue to get shorter until there is nothing left of them.p11\nHabitats.\nSalamanders and newts can be found living in streams. Salamanders can be found in rotten logs, holes or underground places that are wet such as under leaves.p152 Web-toed salamanders live in habitats where there are a lot of rocks. They like to hide under rocks and stones.p195 The tailed frogs, like to live in cold water habitats.p199 In their habitat, amphibians like to live where there are a lot of places to hide. These include nearby small trees, logs and plants. While underwater they like to hide near aquatic plants and rocks. Tree and dart frogs like to live in forests on trees, plants and on the ground under leaves.\nSome amphibia can be found living in the desert or the arctic.p12 The desert froglet lives in the desert. They are only active at night, when temperatures are much cooler. It rarely rains in the desert and because of this, desert frogs will burrow to keep cool. They use their mucus to keep them wet. They will spread it all over their bodies. The mucus will harden to keep the water it produces from escaping. Once the desert frog has done this, it will stay in its cocoon and will not move. They will stay like this for several months to years until a rainstorm. Desert frogs and toads lose water more quickly. The spadefoot toad will spit on the ground. Once they have done this, they will lay on it. Their bodies will take in the water. Their bodies are thin and have a lot of blood vessels, this helps them to be able to take water through their skin. The California newt can survive a fire by spreading its mucous over its body.p12\nArctic frogs such as the wood frog, moor frog and the common frog has to live with freezing temperatures for a long time. They will burrow in places where they can get into a cocoon. Like every living organisms, amphibians must have water to survive. Amphibians however, need freshwater. Some frogs such as burrowing frogs can keep water in their bladders. This allows them to stay underground without drying up. The crab-eating frog lives near water that is somewhat salty. They will eat saltwater crabs. Torrent salamanders lives in cold waters. Because of this they have shorter lungs. Short lungs helps them to float easily.\nDistribution.\nAmphibia are world-wide, though restricted in distribution by their need for moist or watery habitats to reproduce.\nAnatomy.\nSkin.\nMany amphibia have secretions in their skin which makes them toxic. They do not produce toxins themselves. They get toxins from what they eat. They eat insects in their habitat. These insects get the poison from a plant. The toxin has been discovered in beetles. This means that they are likely the cause of poisons found in amphibians. Amphibians do not produce batrachotoxin in captivity, which means that it is not harmful to touch them. The American Indian tribe comeching\u00f3ns used the toxins of the arrow dart frogs when hunting.\nNewts in the genus \"Taricha\" has a poison called tetrodotoxin, a neurotoxin. Scientists believe that toxins in newts are caused by bacteria in the genera \"Pseudoalteromonas\", \"Pseudomonas\" and \"Vibrio\". Because of this, the newts do not have a lot of predators. However, some species of snakes have develop a resistance. This means that they can eat newts without the toxin hurting them. It is a case of co-evolution.\nSenses and skeletal system.\nAmphibians' eyes have lids, glands and ducts. They have good colour vision Caecilian eyes are small and dark. Most of them are blind. Most amphibians have a good sense of smell, even underwater.\nThe skeletal system of amphibians are similar to other four-legged animals. They have a spine, rib cage, long bones such as the humerus and femur. They also have short bones such as the phalanges, metacarpals, and metatarsals. Most amphibians have four limbs, except for caecilians. The bones in amphibians are hollow and do not weigh much.\nDiet.\nAmphibians are predatory animals. They mostly eat live invertebrates and animals that do not move too quickly. These include caterpillars, earthworms, crayfish, water beetles, snails and dragon fly larvae.p667 Many amphibians use their sticky tongues to catch their prey. They will swallow the animal whole, but may chew it just a bit for it to go down their throats. The Ranidae family and the Ceratophrys genus will eat almost anything they can fit into their mouths.p668 These include rodents, birds, ducklings, small fish and small mammals. Most frogs are cannibalistic, and will eat each other if food is no where to be found. Some amphibians will even eat their own tadpoles and eggs if there is no food for them. \nFeeding in captivity.\nIn captivity, pet frogs will be given crickets, worms, small fish, rodents and fruit flies. Adult amphibians can help decrease the mosquito population by eating most of their larvae.\nCaecilians eat earthworms, termites and beetle larvae, and also small lizards.p31 Caecilians rely on their smell to find food. They like to eat earthworms and will find them by picking up their chemical signals. Salamanders and newts are fed a lot of different types of worms. These include blood worms and earthworms. They can eat small fish such as goldfish, fathead minnows and guppies. Salamanders also eat crickets and pinkies, which are baby rats.p771\nConservation.\nThe amphibian population have been decreasing from all locations in the world. Scientists have said that the declining of amphibians is one of the most critical threats to global biodiversity. A number of causes are believed to be involved. These include habitat destruction, over-exploitation, pollution, introduced species, climate change, destruction of the ozone layer, and diseases like chytridiomycosis. Ultraviolet radiation damages the skin, eyes and eggs of amphibians. However, the declines of amphibian population are still not understood.\nThe Amphibian Conservation Action Plan (ACAP) have released a global strategy to help the amphibian population. It was developed by over 80 leading experts. The Amphibian Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) are working on another global strategy to help amphibian populations. The Amphibian Ark (AA) is an organization that was created to help the public be aware of the decline in amphibian populations. They have been working with zoos and aquaria around the world. They try to encourage them to create a natural habitat for threatened amphibians. Another project is the Panama Amphibian Rescue and Conservation Project (PARCP) which are trying to spread awareness about chyridiomycosis. The disease is spreading into eastern Panama and threatening all amphibians living there.\nOn January 21, 2008, Evolutionarily Distinct and Globally Endangered (EDGE) released a statement to the public. It was created by Helen Meredith, who identified nature's most endangered species. Meredith explains that 85% of the top 100 endangered amphibians list are receiving little to no conservation attention.\nHuman use.\nAs food.\nBullfrog legs are a source of food for Southern United States and the Midwestern United States. People hunt bullfrogs at night near rivers. The bullfrogs' legs are cooked, while their backs are fried.p9 In China, bullfrogs are sold alive for eating. However, they are later cooked dead with vegetables. In the state of California, people must have a license to catch bullfrogs for food.p256 In schools, bullfrogs are dissected in biology classes. Usually, this is done in grammar school.p85 The dissecting is a method for teaching students the anatomy of a bullfrog.p85 The emperor newt is hunted in China for food. They are also used there for medicine. Burrowing frogs are able to hold water in their bladder, because of this indigenous Australians use them to drink water.p13\nAs pets.\nAmphibians are also kept as pets.p4 They are kept in aquariums or a terrarium. A terrarium is a tank that is decorated with plants and soil on one side. On the other side, there is water. Most amphibians would need one place for land and another for water.p8 Each type of amphibian should have its special needs taken care of. Semi-aquatic amphibians need both land and water divided in the tank. Tropical frogs would need mist and high humidity in their terrariums.p7 Water for amphibia needs dechlorination. The chlorine in tap water can kill amphibia. Some amphibians popular exotic pets, and are found in pet stores that sell reptiles.p22"}
{"id": "6091", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6091", "title": "Father", "text": "A father (also called dad or daddy) is a male parent. Most human beings are born from a mother and a father. The father of a person's husband or wife is their father-in-law. Fathers determine the gender of their child through a sperm cell which either contains an X chromosome (female), or Y chromosome (male)."}
{"id": "6092", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6092", "title": "Newts", "text": ""}
{"id": "6099", "revid": "5580570", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6099", "title": "Gill", "text": "Gills are what fish, amphibians, and some other animals use to breathe in water. They have feathery parts which cause water to move across the animal's body, which contains dissolved oxygen, after the animal has swallowed the water. The oxygen is absorbed into the animal's blood, causing carbon dioxide moves out of the animal's blood and into the water through the gills.\nFish and frog gills are hidden on the sides of their heads. Sharks have many gills slits on their necks. Baby salamanders have gills that stick out like leaves from their heads.\nIn mushrooms, gills are the spore-bearing structure in agarics (gilled mushrooms) while fish and some young amphibians use them to get oxygen others breath.\nSome insects that live in water have a plastron, which is a kind of gill. It is a patch of special hairs that keeps the water away from the insect's spiracles. This allows them to continue to take in oxygen and remove carbon dioxide while they are under water."}
{"id": "6100", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6100", "title": "Frog", "text": "Frogs are amphibians and vertebrates of the order Anura. There is not much difference between frogs and toads, and they are not classified separately. This is because the toad lifestyle, with its dry, rough, skin, is an adaptation to living in drier habitats. The toad form has evolved a number of times independently, an example of convergent evolution. \nFrogs can live on land and in fresh water. They cannot survive in salt water. Their development is by metamorphosis. They usually hatch as tadpoles from eggs, which are laid by a female frog. The eggs are called frogspawn. Tadpoles have tails and gills. The next stage, the \"froglet,\" develops lungs to breathe air instead of gills, but still have tails. The fully grown frog has long legs and no tail.\nAdult frogs can jump with their legs. They have long tongues that they use to catch bugs. They make a sound called a croak. Some species live in trees, and some types of frog are protected by being poisonous. Frogs live all over the world. If a foreign species of frogs is introduced to another country, the local ecosystem might be affected.\nFrog legs are sometimes eaten as food in France, China, and the Midwest of the United States. The killing of frogs might have an effect on the ecosystem. For example, frogs eat mosquitoes. If frogs are killed, then there are fewer frogs to eat mosquitoes, so more and more mosquitoes are born. Therefore, in these areas, there are more diseases that mosquitoes carry, because there are more mosquitoes. However, for this to apply, frogs would have to be a major predator of mosquitoes. This would only rarely be the case.\nFrogs are members of the class Lissamphibia, the only class of amphibia which has survived to the present day.\nCharacteristics.\nFrogs are cold blooded animals. This means that they need heat to keep up their body temperature. If the temperature outside is cold, amphibians will not be active. Amphibians can get heat from the sun, usually indirectly: whereas reptiles can bask in the sun, amphibia usually do not, because it dries their skin. Some frogs aestivate during winter or during droughts. They usually look for underground place to aestivate. These include burrowing in muds and holes. They survive by getting oxygen through their skin. They come out when the weather outside is favourable.\nFrogs have skin with no scales or hair. They can take in oxygen from either water or air. Mucus that helps their skin to stay wet and slippery. Many amphibians have toxic skin. They have secretions which makes their skin poisonous.\nMany frogs are semi-aquatic. They may live on both land and in water, and in any event prefer damp places. These include ponds, swamps, rivers and lakes. Most adults live where they grew up. Most amphibians lay their eggs in foam nests.\nToads.\nA toad is a large type of frog. It is not a scientific term, but a popular one. The reason it is not used in taxonomy is that the toad life-style has evolved a number of separate times in various groups of frogs.\nAll toads are frogs, but not all frogs are toads. Toads mainly evolved in dry climates, so many toads have rougher, browner skin. Many toads also burrow, though that depends on the environment that the toad evolved in. Toads lay eggs in strings attached to rocks, unlike true frogs which lay eggs in a jelly-like mass. Also, toads generally have shorter legs and fatter bodies. Toads have paratoid glands behind their eyes which are used to make poison.\nDevelopment.\nEven though it is true that most frogs develop from tadpoles, and tadpoles develop from eggs laid in water, there are exceptions. Normally the eggs are fertilised after they are laid, that is, outside the body. However, some use internal fertilisation, though how the males do it is not known. When they are fertilised internally, they also lay eggs, but this time the eggs are already fertilised.\nHowever, a new species has been discovered in Sulawasi, Indonesia, which gives birth to live tadpoles. The frog is now known as \"Limnonectes larvaepartus\". The Limnonectes family are known as 'fanged frogs' because of twin projections on their lower jaws that are used in fighting. Sulawesi is an island which is rapidly losing its forests. The tropical forest is where this frog lives.\nDistribution and habitats.\nDespite these limitations, frogs are widespread, and have adapted to many climates, even deserts. They rely on specific adaptations to survive. Members of the genus \"Cyclorana\" live in the Australian central desert. They bury themselves underground where they create a waterproof cocoon in which to aestivate during dry periods. Once it rains, they come out, find a temporary pool, and breed. Egg and tadpole development is very fast in comparison to those of most other frogs, so breeding can be completed before the pond dries up.\nSome frog species are adapted to a cold environment. The wood frog (\"Rana sylvatica\"), whose habitat extends into the Arctic Circle, buries itself in the ground during winter. Although much of its body freezes during this time, its high concentration of glucose in its vital organs protects them from damage.\nThere are a number of tiny tree frogs which develop from eggs laid in water pools on tropical leaves many meters above the ground. Most of these species do not come to the ground except to mate. Tree frogs have evolved a number of times, but they all have almost identical adaptations. Many millions of years of convergent evolution have resulted in almost identical morphology and habits.\nOverall, frogs are a successful and widespread group. There are about 4,800 recorded species, which is over 85% of living amphibian species. They are one of the five most diverse vertebrate orders."}
{"id": "6101", "revid": "360606", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6101", "title": "Chemical compound", "text": "A chemical compound is a chemical formed from atoms of different chemical elements. The different atoms are joined by chemical bonds. Each compound has a fixed ratio between the elements.\nThe elements stick together so strongly that the compound behaves like one substance. The chemical that is made depends upon what atoms it is made of and how they are joined together. \nChemical compounds can be liquids, like water which is made from atoms of hydrogen and oxygen joining together. They can also be solids, like sodium chloride that contains sodium and chlorine atoms. We get compounds from natural sources such as plants or make them in laboratories. Compounds can be made from others by scientists and these are called \"synthetic chemicals\".\nWhen different compounds are mixed together they may have a chemical reaction. \nSome chemical compounds can be dangerous but are safe if they are used the right way. Most dangerous chemicals are only used by scientists who have had special training in how to handle and use them. These chemicals might be poisonous, corrosive, explosive, they may catch fire easily, or they may react with other substances.\nPeople who work in factories near chemicals often wear special clothes that stop the chemicals from hurting their body."}
{"id": "6102", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6102", "title": "Cranium", "text": ""}
{"id": "6103", "revid": "45220", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6103", "title": "Wood", "text": "Wood is the main substance in trees. It is mainly formed by the xylem vessels which carry water up the plant. The two main substances in wood are cellulose and lignin. Wood is used to make buildings and furniture, and also for art. Firewood is a fuel. Paper is made from wood fibres. Wood is a renewable resource although it has become scarcer in recent centuries.\nWood is hard to cut, but it is also strong. A lumberjack is a person who cuts down trees. After a tree falls, the wood in it can be cut into long, straight pieces called lumber. Lumber can then be used to make posts, or put together with nails, screws, or even glue to make wooden frames for other shapes.\nWood comes in many different kinds. Oak, maple (hardwood) and pine and redwood (softwood) are widely used types of wood. Woods are usually divided into softwood (from conifers) and hardwood from flowering plants.\nHousing.\nFor a long time and even today, many buildings, mostly houses, have been made of wood. To build a house with wood, lumber is put together into frames that are the shape of each wall, floor, and roof of the house. Then the frames are placed into the shape of a house. Then the frames can be covered to make solid walls. Sometimes the walls are made of more wood.\nWhen the outside of a house or building is covered in wood, the wooden pieces are usually flat and stacked. These pieces are called shingles. Wood is also sometimes used in other parts of the house, like doors and staircases. Wood is also used to make fences.\nCarpentry.\nCarpenters make houses of mostly soft wood such as pine. For many kinds of furniture they use harder wood such as maple or oak. When someone builds something with wood, they often paint it. Paint protects and beautifies the wood. Some people like the look of wood, so they put clear paint called \"varnish\" on it. This helps to protect the wood and gives it a shiny finish.\nSome people make art with wood. Sometimes sculptures are built with wood: see Grinling Gibbons.\nRegular pencils are made of wood. Inside is the \"lead\", which is not actually lead. Clay or wax and graphite form the \"lead\" in a pencil.\nPaper.\nWood is turned into paper in large factories called paper mills. Heat, chemicals and machines separate the cellulose fibers from other parts and press the fibers into paper."}
{"id": "6110", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6110", "title": "Chalk", "text": "Chalk is a type of limestone. It was made by calcareous (CaCO3) skeletons of tiny planktonic algae called coccoliths. They live in the sea in huge numbers. They make chalk (CO2) as a by-product of their photosynthesis. The chalk cliffs of Dover and elsewhere were made when England was below the equator in a tropical sea. It was in the Upper Cretaceous, when the Earth was even warmer than now. There are coccoliths today, but not the same species as formed the white cliffs.\nAir and water do not wear chalk away easily, so when chalk is next to the sea, it often makes a large cliff. The \"White Cliffs of Dover\" in Kent, England are a good example of this. Chalk holds water, so these chalk hills may have a lot of water in them. When the weather is very dry, water comes slowly from the chalk. \nBlackboard chalk is not real chalk. It is really gypsum (calcium sulfate), but people call it \"chalk\". People use it for drawing on hard things, because it is soft. If this chalk is rubbed on something hard or rough, it will leave a mark. People often write with chalk on a chalkboard or blackboard. A chalk eraser or water can be used to clean the chalk marks away so the board is clean again. Shops usually sell blackboard chalk in sticks that are about 5 cm long.\nThere are also big pieces of soft chalk for children to write on the ground with, for example on concrete (such as a sidewalk) or on asphalt. It is usually okay to write on the ground with this kind of chalk, because the rain will wash the chalk away.\nTailors' chalk is not real chalk either. It is talc (magnesium silicate). Tailors use it to draw on material when they are making clothes."}
{"id": "6113", "revid": "535100", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6113", "title": "Main page", "text": ""}
{"id": "6114", "revid": "1014714", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6114", "title": "Utilitarianism", "text": "Utilitarianism is the view that the right thing to do is whatever is most useful. It is a about ethics. The word \"utilitarianism\" comes from the word \"utility\", which means \"usefulness\". In most forms of utilitarianism, things that increase human well-being or happiness are called useful. This is not limited to the happiness caused by a single action but also includes the happiness of all people involved and all future consequences.\nIn general, the theory of utilitarianism is that whatever brings the most happiness to the greatest number of people is the right thing to do.\nHistory.\nThe theory was made popular by 18th and 19th century British philosophers like Francis Hutcheson, Jeremy Bentham, and John Stuart Mill, but the idea goes all the way back to ancient times.\nBentham wrote about this idea with the words \"The greatest good for the greatest number,\" but did not use the word \"utilitarianism\". It was Mill, a follower of Bentham's ideas, who named the idea.\nUtilitarianism in Practice.\nMany philosophers argue that utilitarianism has important practical implications for how we should live ethically. For instance, according to utilitarianism we should help the poor, prevent animal suffering, and ensure that future generations have good lives.\nMaslowism.\nMaslowism or Maslow's hierarchy of needs can be divided into social and physical needs. Social needs in Maslowism include physiological, safety, love, esteem, and self-actualization. Maslowist themes like physiology suggests you need food while Maslowist themes like love suggests humans need sex."}
{"id": "6116", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6116", "title": "Village", "text": "A village is a place where people live, normally in the countryside. It is usually larger than a hamlet and smaller than a town or city. In some places, it may be a kind of local government. The dwellings in a village are clustered fairly close to one another, not scattered broadly over the landscape.\nIn the past, villages were where most people lived. Villages were a usual form of community for societies that do subsistence agriculture, and for some non-agricultural societies. After the industrial revolution, when people started making a lot of things in factories, people lived more in towns. Moving to towns is called urbanization. When villages grow a lot they can grow into towns and then cities. This is what happened to Dubai and Chicago.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn The U.K. the biggest difference between a hamlet and a village is that many villages have a church. \nUnited States.\nIncorporated villages.\nThe word \"village\" is not used in most states. However, in twenty US states, a \"village\" is a sort of local government, similar to a city but with less power and for a smaller place. But this is not so in all the United States. In many states, there are villages which are bigger than the smallest cities in the state. The difference is not the population, it is how much power the different sorts of places have, and what they do for people living there.\nNew York state.\nIn New York state, a village is a place which is usually called a town. \nUnincorporated villages.\nIn many states, a \"village\" is only a place where people live, with no legal power, similar to a hamlet in New York state. The name for these is \"unincorporated villages\"."}
{"id": "6117", "revid": "1070978", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6117", "title": "Chelmsford", "text": "Chelmsford is the only city in the county of Essex, England. It is 32 miles northeast of London, about halfway to Colchester. It is nearly in the centre of the county and it is the county town of Essex, but it is not the biggest or the oldest town in the county. It is the centre of the \"borough\" of Chelmsford, which is a bigger place than the city.\nChelmsford has the smallest cathedral in England. John Dee, who wrote the English version of \"Euclid\", went to the Cathedral school in the sixteenth century. Chelmsford is also home to some of the Anglia Ruskin University campuses.\nPeople.\nThe number of people living in the borough is about 170,000; about 115,000 of those live in the city.\nTransport.\nAbout 20,000 people from Chelmsford travel to London every weekday. Another 20,000 people work in Chelmsford who live outside the city. This makes Chelmsford the busiest \"ordinary\" railway station in England (not including junctions and terminuses). (The busiest of all is Clapham Junction railway station).\nThe A12 road from London, which the Romans first built between London and Colchester, went through the town, but now goes around the east, so the number of cars in the town is smaller.\nIndustry.\nChelmsford has been an important centre for industry since the 19th century. It became home to the UK's first electrical engineering works (in 1878), and its first ball bearing factory (in 1898).\nIn 1898, Guglielmo Marconi, the \"father of radio\" opened the World's first radio factory in Hall Street, with about 50 workers. In 1920 the factory was also the home of the first official sound (radio) broadcasts (radio people could listen to from a long way) in the United Kingdom. In 1922 the world's first \"regular\" radio broadcasts started at the Marconi Research Centre at Writtle near Chelmsford.\nPlaces of Interest.\nPlaces of interest in and near Chelmsford are for example Writtle, where Robert I of Scotland was perhaps born, and Pleshey, where the ruins of a castle in William Shakespeare's play \"Richard II\" are.\nHylands House and Park, west of the town, is an old country house. People can visit it, and in the last years it has been the place for a popular yearly music festival, the V Festival.\nThe old Palace of Beaulieu is also nearby.\nChelmsford is also famous for being the birthplace of radio, Marconi was an Italian man who invented the radio and had his first factory in Chelmsford.\nHistory.\nIn 1199 the Bishop of London gave a Royal Charter (a special paper) for the town to have a market. But there have been people living here since pre-historic times. The Romans also lived in Chelmsford. An octagonal temple is under the Odeon roundabout.\nIn World War II bombs hit Chelmsford a number of times. The worst single loss of life happened on Tuesday December 19, 1944. The 367th V-2 rocket which hit England fell near the Hoffmans' ball bearing factory. 39 people were killed and 138 hurt, 47 of them badly. A lot of buildings were destroyed and hundreds more were damaged.\nGeology.\nFrom over 600,000 years ago, the early River Thames went through the place where Chelmsford is now, from Harlow to Colchester. Then it went over today's North Sea and went into the Rhine.\nTwin towns.\nChelmsford is twinned with these:"}
{"id": "6119", "revid": "81377", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6119", "title": "Gangnihessou", "text": "Do-Aklin or Gangnihessou (Ganye Hessou) or Dogbari was the first of twelve kings of Dahomey in Africa. Gangnihessou might have been the king around the year 1620. One of his symbols was a bird called \"gangnihessou\" after his name. His other symbols were a drum, and sticks used for throwing or hunting. He had a younger brother called Dakodonou, who was a king. Some historians think Gangnihessou was not actually a king. Instead, Gangnihessou might have led people by giving advice to his brother."}
{"id": "6121", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6121", "title": "List of famous slaves", "text": ""}
{"id": "6131", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6131", "title": "Contract bridge", "text": "Contract bridge, or simply bridge, is a trick-taking card game which is played by two pairs of players, one pair against the other pair. Partners sit opposite each other at a table.\nMillions of people play bridge worldwide in clubs, tournaments, online and with friends at home. It is one of the world's most popular card games. The World Bridge Federation is the governing body for international competitive bridge.\nThe game consists of a number of \"deals\". Each deal goes through four phases: dealing the cards, the auction (also referred to as bidding), playing the cards, and scoring the results. Most club and tournament play uses duplicate bridge, where the cards are not re-dealt during a session. The same deals are played by most or all players. This allows comparative scoring.\nHistory.\nEarly history of bridge.\nIt is played with the standard 52 cards in four suits. The game developed out of whist, which is a relatively old card game. Bridge developed in a series of stages from about 1890 to about 1930. The stages included bridge-whist and auction bridge, and the developments took place mostly in New York and London. The origin of the word \"bridge\" in this context is not really known. One possibility is that it is taken from an 1886 book, \"Biritch, or Russian Whist\" by John Collinson.\nPlaying method.\nWhist is played with the trump suit chosen by chance, whereas in bridge it is chosen by a process called \"bidding\". A trump is a card which can beat any card from the other three suits.\nIn whist, the winners had to get most of the tricks (a trick is a round of four cards), that is, seven or more tricks. However, in bridge the players bid in sequence to decide what the \"contract\" shall be. The contract is decided by the last bid, and will be in one of the four suits, or in \"no trumps\", without a trump suit.\nThe scoring rules and the bidding process evolved through stages between 1890 and about 1930. Bids at the one level are offers to make at least seven tricks. Bids at the seven level are offers to make all thirteen tricks. The lowest bid one can make is \"one club\" and the highest bid is \"seven no trumps\".\nThe scoring system for bridge is very much more complicated than it is for whist. Fundamentally, it depends on whether or not declarer makes his contract or not. If he does not, the defending side collect penalty points. If he does make the contract his side wins points. How many points are won or lost depends on the scoring system (not discussed here). Harold S. Vanderbilt played a key role in designing the scoring system, and in 1927 the Whist Club of New York produced a code for contract bridge. They and the Portland Club of London became the authorities who guided the later minor changes to the rules.\nThe set-up for playing the cards is also different from whist. The side which wins the bidding sequence plays with only one partner (\"declarer\") controlling both hands. His or her partner is called \"dummy\", and that hand is played face up on the table so all players can see it.\nDuplicate bridge.\nLike much else in the game, the idea of duplicate play was invented for whist. At \"whist drives\" North/South pairs sat in the same positions throughout, East/West pairs moved up the series of tables and boards moved down. This simple movement was invented in the 19th century. The first game of duplicate whist was organised by \"Cavendish\" in London 1857, but it was not followed up. It was played in Chicago in 1880, and the first book about it was written in 1891 by John T. Mitchell. His simple method is known as the Mitchell movement.\nPublicity in the 1930s.\nContract bridge became one of the most popular pastimes when it was publicised by Ely Culbertson, a leading American player and organiser. Anglo-American matches got huge publicity in the newspapers, cinema and radio of the 1930s.\nExample of a bidding sequence.\nIn the example on the right, West was the dealer and first to bid. The bidding goes as shown with South becoming the declarer in a 4 spades contract, he being the first to bid spades. East-West become the defenders and West becomes the opening leader, North becomes the dummy and spades the trump suit.\nTen tricks are required by North-South, six tricks plus the 4-level bid.\nMechanical dealing.\nMostly, bridge is a social game played in clubs. A number of tables play the same set of hands, which allows for the scoring of individual pairs to be ranked. The deal is done by a computerised method. A pseudo-random algorithm sets the hands (the sets of cards held by each player). The computer is linked to a mechanical device which deals the cards and delivers them into the hands. These are put into the holding boards. The boards are then put on the tables.\nSources.\nDaniels, David 1980. \"The Golden Age of Contract Bridge\". New York: Stein and Day. ISBN 978-0812825763. Includes all stages from the history of whist to contract bridge, up to about 1950."}
{"id": "6134", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6134", "title": "Bridge game", "text": ""}
{"id": "6135", "revid": "838831", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6135", "title": "No", "text": "No is an English word which has a negative meaning. It is the antonym (opposite) of the word Yes, which is a positive term.\nNo is used when someone is denying or turning away something. It can also be used in different figures of speech.\nIn both sentences and talking, the words \"No\" and the word \"Not\" can both be used, though the word \"No\" is mainly used when speaking to other people. In some cases, however, \"Not\" is not acceptable, and vice versa. These words are not to be confused with the similar sounding words know and knot.\nExamples of proper usage of \"No\" and \"Not\":\nExamples of improper usage of \"No\" and \"Not\":"}
{"id": "6136", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6136", "title": "Old English language", "text": ""}
{"id": "6139", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6139", "title": "Gurps", "text": ""}
{"id": "6145", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6145", "title": "Leon Trotsky", "text": " (; also transliterated \"Leo\", \"Lev\", \"Trotskii\", \"Trotski\", \"Trotskij\" and \"Trotzky\"; October 26 (O.S.) = November 7 (N.S.), 1879 in Kropyvnytskyi (nowadays Ukraine) - August 21, 1940 in Coyoac\u00e1n, Mexico) was the public name of Leib or Lev Davidovich Bronstein. He was a Russian revolutionary and political theoretician. He was of Jewish-Ukrainian descent. After leading the Red Army in the Russian Civil War, he disagreed with other Bolsheviks and had to leave Russia.\nTrotsky was a socialist and a Marxist. In 1905 there was a revolution in Russia. Trotsky helped organize a committee of workers in St Petersburg which was called the Soviet. When the leader of the Soviet was arrested, Trotsky became leader of the Soviet in his place. Trotsky helped to expand on the idea of Permanent Revolution, which is a theory originally thought up by Karl Marx.\nAfter the revolution Trotsky left Russia for his own safety. In 1917, he returned to Russia because of the Russian Revolution. He helped to bring about communism in Russia and defend it during the Russian Civil War. He was in charge of the army at this time. When the leader of the Bolsheviks (the party who led the revolution) Vladimir Lenin died, Trotsky became involved in a power struggle with Joseph Stalin for the leadership of the party. He lost, and Stalin came to power. He had to leave Russia because of Stalin, who was now his own enemy and wanted to harm Trotsky. In 1938 Trotsky founded the Fourth International. Stalin had one of his spies, Spaniard Ram\u00f3n Mercarder, stab Trotsky to death in Mexico in 1940.\nPeople who believe in Trotsky's ideas are called Trotskyists and follow \"Trotskyism\". The main Trotskyist organizations today are the Fourth International (post - Reunification), the Socialist Workers Party in the UK and the International Socialist Tendency.\nIn the novel \"Animal Farm\" by George Orwell, Trotsky is represented by Snowball the pig and Stalin is represented by Napoleon who was also a pig. The book reflected real world events."}
{"id": "6146", "revid": "7123559", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6146", "title": "Second International", "text": "The Second International (1889\u20131916) was an organization created on July 14, 1889, by socialist and labour parties who wanted to work together for international socialism. It continued the work of the First International, which stopped being an organization in 1886. However, it did not include the still-powerful anarcho-syndicalist movement and trade unions.\nAmong the Second International's most famous actions were its 1889 declaration of May 1 as International Labor Day and its 1910 declaration of March 8 as International Women's Day.\nThe International's permanent executive and information body was the International Socialist Bureau (ISB). It was located in Brussels and formed after the International's Paris Congress of 1900. Emile Vandervelde and Camille Huysmans of the Belgian Labour Party were its chair and secretary. Vladimir Lenin was a member from 1905.\nDadabhai Nauroji attended it's Paris commune in 1906."}
{"id": "6147", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6147", "title": "Devon", "text": "Devon is a county in southwest England. Sometimes called by its historical name \"Devonshire\". Devon is the fourth largest county in England by area, and has the longest road network of any county in England.\nHistory.\nAfter the last ice age, Devon was one of the first places in England where people started to live. Archaeologists have found many old places in Devon with ancient buildings. For example, many ruins of old buildings have been found in an area called \"Dartmoor\", which is now a National Park.\nDevon gets its name from the \"Dumnonii\", a name that the invading Romans gave to the Celtic tribe in that area. The Romans invaded Devon about AD 50. The name \"Dumnonii\" means \"a person who lives in a deep valley\", and it comes from the hills and valleys of the area. The Roman army stayed in Devon for about 350 years. Their base was in the city of Exeter.\nIt was a long time before anyone else invaded Devon. Saxons came to Devon in the 7th century, and the King of Wessex may have attacked in 614. There was a conflict between Devon and Wessex for 200 years. Some historians think that Wessex won the war by about 715 but others think this did not happen until at least 936. Eventually Wessex took control, but the Kings of Devon still had some power.\nA person living at the time called William of Malmesbury said that in Exeter both Britons and Saxons were equal in 927 but that King Athelstan of Wessex then chased the Britons from Exeter. From place names and church dedications it seems that the British did not go far and later came back into Exeter because an area in the city was called \"Britayne\" until recently.\nA large number of Devon placenames include (or are) the word \"combe\" (e.g. Ilfracombe). This word comes from the Brythonic (Celtic) language and is like the Welsh word \"cwm\". Another typical Devon word is \"tor\" which is also Brythonic, and like the Welsh word \"twr\".\nBoth of these words are often found in neighbouring counties, but Devon has the greatest number. Overall Devon has a number of other placenames that are Brythonic and others that come from Old English, and a few that come from Norse. Devon's placenames are like those of western Somerset and eastern Cornwall which was also part of the old kingdom of \"Dumnonia\".\nStarting in the 9th century, groups of Viking raiders tried to invade Devon. This continued until the Norman Conquest. The name of \"Lundy Island\" comes from the Viking language, which was called Norse. The Vikings are remembered for moving the cathedral from Crediton to Exeter.\nDevon has been involved in most of the civil conflicts in England since 1066:\nThere are many famous (well known) people from Devon, especially seamen. For example, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Richard Grenville and Sir Walter Raleigh all come from Devon. Many other famous people were also born in Devon: for example, the author Agatha Christie was born in the town of Torquay.\nFlag.\nDevon has its own flag. It is linked to St Petroc, who is a local saint with links to Devon and nearby counties. The flag was chosen after winning a competition on the BBC Devon website in 2003.\nEconomy.\nDevon is less wealthy than many parts of England, for example the south east. This is because the traditional industries of Devon, for example fishing, mining and farming are declining. The European Union has given parts of Devon help (Objective 2). For example, grants of money have been given to help new industries grow. Tourism has become more important recently as a part of the economy of Devon.\nAn epidemic of Foot and Mouth disease in 2001 led to many farmers losing their cattle, so they lost a lot of money. Other industries also lost a lot of income because of this.\nPolitics.\nThe main city of Devon is Plymouth. Exeter is where the county council is based. The county of Devon is split up into districts. Each district is run by a district council. Some things are the job of the county council and others are the job of the district council. There are also smaller town and parish councils inside the districts.\nPlymouth and Torbay are not run by the county council, but have their own special councils. These councils do the jobs of both a county and a district council. These type of areas are called \"unitary authorities\".\nDistricts in Devon.\nThe numbers on the map are linked to the numbers below.\nCities towns and villages.\nThis is a list of the main towns and cities of Devon:\nOther websites.\n\"Note: The links below are not in simple English.\""}
{"id": "6148", "revid": "374195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6148", "title": "Latin script", "text": "Latin or Roman script, is a writing system used to write many modern-day languages. It is the most used writing system in the world today. It is the official script for nearly all the languages of Western Europe and of some Eastern European languages. It is also used by some non-European languages such as Turkish, Vietnamese, Malay language, Somali, Swahili and Tagalog. It is an alternative writing system for languages such as Serbian and Bosnian.\nThe alphabet is a writing system which evolved from a western variety of the Greek alphabet. It was the Etruscans who first developed it after borrowing the Greek alphabet, and the Romans developed it further. The sounds of some letters changed, some letters were lost and gained and several writing styles ('hands') developed. Two such styles were combined into one script with upper and lower case letters ('capitals' and 'small letters'). Modern capital letters differ only slightly from their Roman counterparts. There are few regional variations.\nLetters.\nOriginal Latin alphabet.\nThe Latin alphabet used by the Romans:\nNew alphabet.\nThe modern version of the alphabet is used for writing many languages. Indo-European languages, especially those of Western Europe, are mostly written with the Latin alphabet. These languages include the Germanic languages (which includes English, German, Swedish, and others) and the Romance languages (which includes French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese and others). There are of course Indo-European languages that do not use the Latin alphabet, like Greek and Russian, as well as non-Indo-European languages that do, like Vietnamese.\nNearly all languages using the Roman alphabet include diacritics, which are symbols found above or below the letters. They are used for things such as tones and pronunciation. English is the only major European language that does not have any of these marks, at least not for native words. Words taken from other languages sometimes use diacritics to make clear the correct pronunciation.\nThe basic alphabet uses the following letters:\nOther versions.\nThe Roman script has fewer letters than the sounds in some of the languages that use it. Some languages make up for the lack of letters by using diacritic marks, such as \u0103, \u00e2, \u00e1, \u00e9, \u00ed, \u00ee, \u00f3, \u1eb9, \u1ecb, \u1ecd, \u1ee5, \u00e3, \u1ea3, \u1ebb, \u1ec9, \u1ecf, \u1ee7, \u00f1, \u010d, \u010f, \u011b, \u00ed, \u0148, \u0159, \u0161, \u0219, \u0165, \u021b, \u00fa, \u016f, \u017e and \u0111. In effect, this increases the number of letters in their alphabet. Languages which use \"some\" of these characters are French, Czech, Polish, Magyar (Hungarian), Romanian, Spanish, Tagalog, Vietnamese, Esperanto, and Igbo. \nMany languages changed their writing systems to the Latin script. In some countries, Europeans made native people use it. The Vietnamese language was written in Chinese characters, and there is a Chinese-based Vietnamese writing system called chu nom. However, Chinese script requires a large number of characters to be learnt before a person is truly literate. The Vietnamese government switched to the Latin alphabet in the early 20th century so they could increase the country's literacy rates. The Vietnamese kept using the Latin alphabet even after independence since it was much faster to learn than Chinese characters (chu nom). \nAfter the Russian Revolution, when the Russian Empire fell, the Latin alphabet in Turkic countries was started by Azerbaijan in 1918. When the Soviet Union broke up, some of its smaller languages began using the Latin alphabet. It is now used in Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Azerbaijan. Kazakhstan announced in 2018 that the Latin alphabet would become the Kazakh language's main writing system.\nChanging the way a language is written to Latin letters is called romanization. Many people who do not speak the language read a romanized version to know roughly how the words will sound, even if that is not the normal way to write the language. Some languages, like Chinese and Japanese, use the Latin alphabet in their languages so that they can be typed on a computer more easily. In mainland China, pinyin is the official romanization for Mandarin Chinese, and it is used to type Chinese characters on the computer by typing them phonetically. Even though many Japanese computers have kana keyboards to type Japanese on the computer, Japanese can also be typed using the Latin alphabet. Software called IME (input method editor) converts the Latin letters, called romaji in Japanese, into Japanese kana and kanji."}
{"id": "6149", "revid": "1000261", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6149", "title": "Insectivore", "text": "An insectivore is an animal or insect that eats mostly insects for food. An Anteater is an animal that eats ants. Insectivorous plants also eat insects. The Venus fly-trap is one of them.\nTo eat insects for food is not very easy because insects are small. Large insect-eating animals must eat many of them. Anteaters eat hundreds of ants every day.\nSome omnivores like humans and bears also eat insects for food. There was once a taxonomic group of mammals called Insectivora. Most of its animals are now called Eulipotyphla."}
{"id": "6150", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6150", "title": "Copy", "text": "Copy means a thing that is made to look like another thing."}
{"id": "6152", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6152", "title": "Vapor", "text": "Vapor (British English: vapour) is a mass of small drops of liquid which fly in the air, for example because the liquid has been heated.\nThe temperature at which each material turns into vapor is determined according to the air pressure."}
{"id": "6153", "revid": "1147175", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6153", "title": "Vehicle", "text": "A vehicle is a machine to move people and things. A vehicle is not alive. A horse can move people and things, but it is an animal, not a machine or a vehicle.The word vehicle is borrowed from French and Latin. French \"v\u00e9hicule\", going back to Middle French, borrowed from Medieval Latin \"vehiculum\" \"medium, agent of transmission,\" going back to Latin, \"wheeled vehicle, means of transport,\" from \"vehere\" \"to carry, convey.\nTypes of vehicles\nLand vehicles.\nSome vehicles move on land. Most land vehicles have wheels. Examples of land vehicles are bicycles, cars, motorcycles, and trains.\nLand vehicles that are powered by an engine or motor are called motor vehicles.\nSome land vehicles, like tanks and snowmobiles, have tracks. These tracks look and work like conveyor belts.\nWater vehicles.\nSome vehicles move on, or in, the water. Examples are boats, ships, and submarines.\nAir and space vehicles.\nVehicles that move in the sky are called aircraft. Examples are aeroplanes and balloons.\nSome vehicles, like the Space Shuttle, can even leave the Earth's orbit and go to outer space.\nPower.\nVehicles can be propelled by various sources of energy. "}
{"id": "6154", "revid": "700996", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6154", "title": "Line dance", "text": "Line dancing is a form of group dancing that is done to either country or hip-hop music. The term line dance is derived from the idea that the group of people participating in the dance are all facing the same direction when conducting the series of moves in the line dance. A line dance can go from 32 beats upwards of up to 92 beats per minutes, and can also be either a 4 or 2 wall dance. When the dance starts off everyone is facing the front wall, after all of the counts of the dance are complete (let's say we were doing a 32 count dance) then everyone would finish the dance facing either the back wall or the left or right wall. One example of a line dance is the \"Men In Black\" line dance. This dance is usually done to a hip-hop song, such as \"Yeah 3X\", by Chris Brown. Once the first 32 counts of the dance are completed everyone will finish the dance facing the left wall, and would have turned one quarter to their left counter clockwise. Once the series of moves is completed 4 times the group will end up facing the front wall again."}
{"id": "6158", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6158", "title": "Three Kingdoms of Korea", "text": "The Three Kingdoms of Korea were Goguryeo, Baekje and Silla. They existed between the 1st century BC and 7th century CE. There were some smaller kingdoms like Gaya, Dongye, Okjeo, Buyeo, Usan, Tamna, etc.\nBaekje helped spread Chinese characters, Chinese culture, Han Buddhism, and other technology to Japan.\nThe Three Kingdoms period ended in 668: Silla allied with the Tang Dynasty to conquer Baekje and then Goguryeo. Korea unified under Later Silla. The Tang occupied the northern parts of Korea. After this Korea split during the North and South States period.\nBesides Chinese records, the books \"Samguk Sagi\" and \"Samguk Yusa\" also record the history of the era\".\" \"Samguk\" (Hangul: \uc0bc\uad6d, Hanja: \u4e09\u570b) means \"Three Kingdoms\". "}
{"id": "6162", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6162", "title": "Eckernf\u00f6rde", "text": "Eckernf\u00f6rde (Danish: Egernf\u00f8rde, sometimes also \"Egernfjord\", Low German: Eckernf\u00f6r, sometimes also \"Eckernf\u00f6\u00f6r\") is a German city in Schleswig-Holstein, Kreis Rendsburg-Eckernf\u00f6rde at the Baltic Sea near Kiel. The population is about 23,000.\nAll 24 German submarines are stationed in Eckernf\u00f6rde.\nEckernf\u00f6rde is a well-known touristic centre in Northern Germany."}
{"id": "6166", "revid": "847394", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6166", "title": "Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria", "text": "Franz Ferdinand Karl Ludwig Josef of Austria, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Este (Franz Ferdinand Karl Ludwig Josef; ) (18 December 1863 \u2013 28 June 1914) was an Archduke (like a prince) of Austria and, from 1896 until his death, next in lineto be the emperor of the former country called Austria-Hungary. He was killed in the city Sarajevo by Gavrilo Princip. Because of this, Austria declared war against Serbia, which started the first World War. "}
{"id": "6168", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6168", "title": "Black Hand", "text": "Black Hand or Crna Ruka, officially Ujedinjenje ili Smrt (\"Unification or Death\") was a secret group of Serbian nationalists (Pan-Serbians). It was founded in 1911 in Serbia. \nTheir aim was to create a country from other countries where Serbs lived, including Bosnia-Herzegovina which was a part of Austria-Hungary since 1908. \nKilling of Franz Ferdinand.\nFive members of The Black Hand were in Sarajevo, Serbia, on 28 June, 1914 where Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the heir to the throne in Austria-Hungary, visited with his wife. Ferdinand was driven through the city in a convertible car. The members of the Black Hand attempted to kill Ferdinand by throwing grenades at his car. One of the grenades bounced off his car and exploded under the car following Ferdinand's. One of the members swallowed cyanide and attempted to jump into the river, however the cyanide was old, and the river was shallow, so he was arrested. One of the men, a Bosnian student called Gavrilo Princip, went to a cafe after failing to kill Ferdinand. \nThe Archduke and his wife decided to go and visit the people who were injured in the explosion in hospital, however the driver took a wrong turn and stopped outside the cafe where Princip was eating. Princip saw this and went outside. He took out a gun and shot at Ferdinand; two bullets hit the archduke, one hit his wife, and the other hit the car. Both Ferdinand and his wife died shortly after.\nAustria-Hungary blamed Serbia for the assassination. Austria-Hungary then declared war on Serbia, and Russia joined the war on Serbia's side because the people of Serbia were Slavic, like Russia, and the Slavic countries had agreed to help each other if they were attacked. Since Russia is a large country it had to move soldiers closer to the war, but Germany feared that Russia's soldiers would also attack Germany. Russia did not like Germany because of things Germany had done in the past to become stronger. Germany declared war on Russia, and used a plan to attack Russia that had been created before the war, but it also involved attacking France and Belgium. France and Great Britain joined the war because Great Britain had agreed to help Belgium if it were ever attacked by someone else.\nThis quickly led to a full-scale war. Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. Both country's allies became involved in the war, and soon most of Europe became involved.\nThe Black Hand also killed and ."}
{"id": "6169", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6169", "title": "Edmonton", "text": "Edmonton is the capital city of Alberta. In 2008, there were about 1,102,000 people in the Edmonton area.\nEdmonton is just south of the middle of Alberta in the prairie part of the province. There are many farms close to Edmonton.\nThe city started as a trading post on the North Saskatchewan River. Edmonton turned into a city mostly over the last 100 years. \nEdmonton has of one of the world's largest shopping malls. This mall is called the West Edmonton Mall. This mall has over 800 stores, a hotel, an indoor water park, an indoor theme park, an ice skating rink, movie theatres, places to eat and drink, and other things to see. Many, many people visit the West Edmonton Mall. \nEdmonton also has more sun than all other cities in Canada. But other cities are warmer than Edmonton. Winter temperatures often are below -20 degrees Celsius. It is common for it be even colder (below -30 degrees Celsius) for a few days in January or February. However, the summer can be warmer than 25 or 30 degrees. The sun does not set until after 11 pm in June.\nThe city is also well known for its festivals. There are many popular events in both summer and winter, such as Heritage Days, the Folk Festival, and the Fringe.\nEdmonton has many interesting places to visit. Places such as The Francis Winspear Centre for Music, the Valley Zoo, Fort Edmonton Park, the Muttart Conservatory,and Telus World of Science.\nEdmonton is known as the city of champions, is home to the Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League, the Edmonton Eskimos of the Canadian Football League. The Edmonton Oilers have 5 Stanley Cup Championships, the Eskimos have 23 Western Division Championships, and 13 Grey Cup Championships.\nThe Edmonton tornado was the second deadliest tornado in Canada that struck the east side of the city in July 31, 1987."}
{"id": "6170", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6170", "title": "Autarky", "text": "Autarky is an economy that does no trade with the outside world. It is called a self-sufficient economy or a closed economy too. It does not need any other countries or regions helping.\nAutarky is rare in the modern world. An example of a currently run autarky is North Korea, but even it makes a small amount trade between some countries, like China and Japan."}
{"id": "6172", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6172", "title": "Bonsai", "text": " is the Japanese art of growing small trees in pots. This is done by growing the tree in a small pot or tray and pruning (cutting) the branches and roots to keep the tree small over time. Bonsai trees are trained to grow into a shape that is pleasing to look at. The best bonsai trees appear to be old, and to have a shape that seems like a real tree except much smaller.\nThe word \"bonsai\" means \"tree in tray\" in the Japanese language. Bonsai is a very old art form in Japan. It is a Japanese form of the older Chinese art called penjing. Penjing is a Chinese art form that also uses trees growing in pots. Other nations also have arts like bonsai and penjing.\nPeople like bonsai because it is nice to look at, and because it is fun to grow a bonsai tree. A bonsai tree can live for a very long time, longer than a person can live. In a family, a bonsai might be started by a grandparent, then given to a parent, then given to a child over many years.\nA bonsai starts with a small tree. This tree can be grown from a seed, or can be found already growing in a yard or a park or the forest. It can also be bought from a plant store.\nTo make the bonsai, the small tree is taken out of the ground. Its roots are carefully cleaned of dirt. The roots may be trimmed (cut) a little to help them fit in a small pot. The branches may also be trimmed to make the tree smaller. Then it is put in a bonsai pot, which has low sides. Fresh soil (dirt) is put in the pot to cover the bonsai tree's roots. Then it is watered and put outdoors to live.\nGood trees to make into bonsai have small leaves (pine tree needles are leaves too). If the leaves are too big, the bonsai will not look like a small tree. A good bonsai tree will have old-looking bark and old-looking roots too.\nHistory.\nThe art of bonsai began in Japan over one thousand years ago. It was brought to Japan from China around the year 800 A.D. At first, bonsai were planted in large pots like the Chinese used. But the Japanese later put them in very low, almost flat pots. This change made the tree itself the most important thing in the art form, not the fancy pot or small houses or statues of people which other nations used with their small trees in pots. \nAt first only the rich and noble people of Japan had bonsai. One family could have many bonsai, which would grow in pots in the garden outside of the house. A servant might take care of all the bonsai and would learn a lot about how to grow bonsai. The rules about how to grow a bonsai properly were not well known and were not shared with other people. Later more people began to grow bonsai. Some were holy people, like monks. Some were Japanese families who were not noble or really rich, but who had enough money and time to grow one or two bonsai in their gardens or house yards. This larger group of people began to share what they learned about the rules of bonsai and so more people could join in growing bonsai. By the twentieth (20th) century, the rules of bonsai were very well known in Japan and many people could afford to grow their own bonsai.\nCultivation.\nA tree that could be used for bonsai is not small in nature. If left to grow in the open soil, a bonsai tree would grow as big as any other tree. But in a pot, the tree will not grow very big. To help keep it small, the owner of the bonsai trims (cuts) its leaves and branches every year. Every two or three years, the bonsai owner lifts the bonsai out of its pot and trims the roots. Then the owner puts the bonsai back in its pot with some new soil.\nA bonsai grower checks the soil of every bonsai pot once every day. If the soil is nearly dry, the grower waters it until it is wet from the top of the soil to the bottom of the pot. Every few weeks the grower adds a little fertilizer to each bonsai tree's soil. In the winter this happens less often. \nA bonsai can live to be older than a large tree of the same species if it is grown with care. A bonsai needs good care, and a bonsai with poor care will not be healthy and might die. To keep a bonsai strong, it must grow outdoors like a real tree. It must never get too dry or stay too wet. It must never get too hot or too cold. If it gets a plant sickness like a fungus, it must be cured quickly. If it gets bugs like aphids the bugs must be cleaned off or killed quickly.\nShapes.\nIn the art of bonsai a sense of beauty, patience, and good care are all needed. The plant, the shape of the plant, as well as the arrangement of soil and the kind of pot used are important.\nEach bonsai has a shape, partly the shape and direction of the trunk and partly the shape of the whole tree with its branches and leaves. The most common shapes are known as \"styles\", including\nUpright-style.\nThe upright style has a straight trunk that points up. Its branches are big at the bottom and small at the top.\nInformal-style.\nThe informal style has curves in the trunk. Its branches are also larger at the bottom and smaller at the top.\nSlanted-style.\nThe slanted-style bonsai trunk does not point straight up like the upright style. The trunk comes out of the soil at an angle and points to the left or right.\nCascade-style.\nThe cascade-style bonsai look like trees that grow out over water or on the sides of mountains. The tip of the tree is low, and may even fall below the base of the pot.\nBroom-style.\nThe broom style has a trunk that is straight and upright. Branches stick out in all directions from about 1/3 of the way up the trunk.\nForest-style.\nThe or \"group planting\" has several trees in one pot or on a flat slab of rock.\nOther styles.\nThere are many other known styles for Japanese bonsai. When bonsai are shown to the public, or when they appear in a catalog to be sold to people, the style that best matches the bonsai will often be put in the tree's description. This allows the person looking at the bonsai to understand the plan or goal of the person who made the bonsai."}
{"id": "6174", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6174", "title": "Chastity belt", "text": "A chastity belt is a device locked around the wearer's genitals to prevent sexual intercourse. Chastity belts for women were introduced into Europe from Italy, and saw some limited degree of use during the Renaissance period.\nThey were not used until the 16th century, and then only rather rarely. They first became widely available as 19th-century anti-masturbation medical devices. Many of the belts on public display in museums have now been tested to determine their correct age, with the earliest found to originate in the early 1800s.\nIn modern times, belts for both men and women are used in BDSM."}
{"id": "6175", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6175", "title": "Abiword", "text": ""}
{"id": "6178", "revid": "12963", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6178", "title": "Manchester united", "text": ""}
{"id": "6179", "revid": "40945", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6179", "title": "Man utd", "text": ""}
{"id": "6180", "revid": "40946", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6180", "title": "Man U", "text": ""}
{"id": "6181", "revid": "40947", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6181", "title": "MUFC", "text": ""}
{"id": "6182", "revid": "40948", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6182", "title": "M.U.F.C", "text": ""}
{"id": "6184", "revid": "6633723", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6184", "title": "Mount Arafat", "text": "Mount Arafat or Mount Arafah ( transliterated \"Jabal \u2018Araf\u0101t\") is a granite hill east of Mecca in the plain of Arafat. Arafat is a plain about southeast of Mecca. Mount Arafat reaches about in height and is also known as the Mount of Mercy (\"Jabal ar-Rahmah\"). According to Islamic tradition, the hill is the place where the Islamic prophet Muhammad(SAW) (PBUH) stood and delivered the Farewell Sermon to the Muslims who had accompanied him for the Hajj towards the end of his life.\nOn the 9th of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah pilgrims go to Arafat from Mina, for the most important part of the Hajj. The Khutbah of Hajj is narrated and Zuhr prayer and Asr prayer are prayed together. The pilgrims spend the whole day on the mountain to supplicate to Allah to forgive their sins and to pray for personal strength in the future.\nHajj.\nArafah rituals end at sunset and pilgrims then move to Muzdalifah for a shortened Maghrib Prayer and Isha prayer and for a short rest.\nThe level area surrounding the hill is called the Plain of Arafat. The term Mount Arafah is sometimes applied to this entire area. It is an important place in Islam because during the Hajj, pilgrims spend the afternoon there on the ninth day of Dhul Hijjah (\u0630\u0648 \u0627\u0644\u062d\u062c\u0629). Failure to be present in the plain of Arafat on the required day invalidates the pilgrimage.\nSince late 2010, this place is served by Mecca Metro. On a normal Hajj, it would be around to walk."}
{"id": "6186", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6186", "title": "Ariel Sharon", "text": "Ariel Sharon (February 26, 1928 \u2013 January 11, 2014) was an Israeli politician of Likud and later Kadima. Sharon was Prime Minister of Israel from 2001 to 2006.\nEarly life.\nSharon was born on February 27, 1928 in Kfar Malal, British-Palestine. Sharon was in the Israel Army for many years. He fought in numerous battles, and in 1974 he left the army as General. After leaving the army he decided to go to politics.\nPolitics.\nIn 1977, he became Minister of Agriculture. In 1981 he became the Minister of Defence. In 1983, he was sent away from the government as Minister of Defence after he was found to be guilty for not preventing a massacre in Lebanon where many hundreds of civilians were killed by other civilians.\nIn 2001, he was elected for Prime Minister after the war between Israel and Palestine started. In 2004, he surprised many people when he said that Israel will get out of the Gaza Strip, which is the place where many Palestinian people live.\nHealth.\nIn December 2005, Sharon was taken into hospital. On January 4, 2006, Sharon was again taken to the hospital. He had a big stroke (bleeding in the brain).\nRumours spread immediately of his death, though these were denied by his physicians. It was soon reported and later confirmed that Sharon was in a coma. Ehud Olmert, another member of Sharon's newly formed \"Kadima\" party, was acting Prime Minister until elections were held in Israel, after which Olmert became Prime Minister of Israel.\nDeath.\nSharon died on 11 January 2014. He died from kidney failure and stroke complications at the hospital in Ramat Gan. He had been in a coma at the time. He was aged 85.\nHis state funeral was held on 13 January. He was buried in line with Jewish burial customs. It was held as soon after death as possible. The day before the funeral, Sharon's body and coffin were placed in the Knesset building for people to see. His funeral began with an official ceremony held in the Knesset chamber. Politicians from Israel and other countries attended. His funeral was then held at his family's farm in the Negev desert. Sharon was buried there beside his wife, Lily.\nLeaders attended his funeral service included U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, former Dutch Prime Minister Wim Kok, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, Czech Prime Minister Ji\u0159\u00ed Rusnok and German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier."}
{"id": "6188", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6188", "title": "Yassir Arafat", "text": ""}
{"id": "6189", "revid": "572778", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6189", "title": "Jameson", "text": "Jameson is a famous brand of Irish whiskey. It is amber in color and has quite a strong smell. It is an alcoholic beverage.\nIn Ireland, people refer to it as \"Jemmie\"."}
{"id": "6190", "revid": "40954", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6190", "title": "George W Bush", "text": ""}
{"id": "6193", "revid": "1157907", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6193", "title": "Syria", "text": "Syria is a country in the Middle East, the west part of Asia. It borders (from south to north) on Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, Iraq, and Turkey. Its western part faces the Mediterranean Sea. Its eastern and northern parts are mountainous.\nThe current president and head of state is Bashar al-Assad. Syria's national capital is Damascus. The biggest city is Aleppo. The Syrian civil war began in 2011.\nThe population of Syria is 74% Sunni, 12% Alawi, 10% Christian.\nHistory.\nSyria has a very long history. It was a land of Phoenicians. Later it became part of the Achaemenid Empire, Roman Empire, and then the Eastern Roman Empire. In those days people spoke the Syriac language. The city Antioch was great and one of the important cities in Christendom. The Umayyad Caliphate took control of Syria in the 7th century. In this Arab Empire people began to speak the Arabic language. Today most Syrian people believe in Islam but there are still Christians too.\nWhen World War I started, the Ottoman Empire ruled Syria and many other places. When it ended, France controlled Lebanon and Syria. Britain had Iraq, Jordan and Palestine. They drew a border between Iraq and Syria in 1920. France controlled Syria until 1946 when Syria became its own country.\nSyria was part of the United Arab Republic with Egypt in 1958-1961. Syria had some wars with Israel and some territories like the Golan Plateau were occupied by Israel.\nIn 2012 with the Arab Spring a bloody civil war began against President Bashar al-Assad.\nKurdish people control a small part of the northern region called Rojava.\nIt is also known as Western Kurdistan.\nGeography.\nSyria is between latitudes 32\u00b0 and 38\u00b0 N, and longitudes 35\u00b0 and 43\u00b0 E. It is mostly arid plateau. The area bordering the Mediterranean is fairly green. The Euphrates, Syria's most important river, crosses the country in the east.\nThe climate in Syria is dry and hot. Winters are mild.\nPolitics and government.\nSyria is a republic. The old Constitution of Syria was started on 13 March 1971. It made Syria as a secular socialist state. Islam was the majority religion. A new constitution has been in place since 2012.\nBranches of government.\nThe executive branch is the president, two vice presidents, the prime minister, and the Council of Ministers. The constitution says the president must be a Muslim. It does not make Islam the state religion. According to the 2012 constitution, the president is elected by Syrian people in a direct election.\nThe People's Council is the legislative branch.\nState control.\nNearly all of Syria\u2019s radio and television outlets are state owned. The Ba'ath Party controls nearly all newspapers.\nHuman rights.\nSyria's human rights are among the worst in the world, according to human rights organizations such as Human Rights Watch. The authorities arrest democracy and human rights activists, censor websites, detain bloggers, and have travel bans.\nGovernorates.\nSyria has fourteen Governorates, or \"muhafazat\". The governorates are divided into sixty districts. The governorates are:\nMilitary.\nThe President of Syria is commander in chief of the Syrian armed forces. There are about 400,000 troops. Ethnic Kurds have their own army called YPG. The Males must go in the military when they are age 18.\nEconomy.\nSyria is a middle-income country. The economy is based on agriculture, oil, industry, and tourism.\nTransport.\nSyria has three international airports (Damascus, Aleppo and Lattakia). They are hubs for Syrian Air. Foreign airlines also fly to them. Most Syrian cargo is carried by Chemins de Fer Syriens, the Syrian railway company.\nDemographics.\nMost people live in the Euphrates valley and along the coastal plain, a fertile strip between the coastal mountains and the desert.\nEducation is free from ages 6 to 12. All children this age must attend school.\nSports.\nThe most popular sports in Syria are football, basketball, swimming, and tennis. Damascus was home to the fifth and seventh Pan Arab Games. Many popular football teams are based in Damascus, Aleppo, Homs, and Latakia."}
{"id": "6194", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6194", "title": "Yahoo", "text": ""}
{"id": "6204", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6204", "title": "Psychology", "text": "Psychology is the study of the mind. The study also covers thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. It also falls under the academic domain; some parts of psychology follow the way of doing science: explains the mind, how it works, and what it shows through our actions.\nWhen doing psychology, it has to deal with humans most of the time but animals beyond humans at some point. People, experts or not, can't study psychology as a whole. So, we divide small parts of it one step at a time. Also, psychology has much in common with other fields that they overlap with one another. Some of these fields fall in natural sciences or not. \nPsychologists practice the field in the profession; they undergo long years of schooling than laypeople. These practitioners attempt to explain how minds function in the self (individual) and self with others (social). These attempts might also deal with how the body's way affects the mind--its processes and approaches. They can also be scientists in the field of social, behavioral, and cognitive. \u00a0\nBranches.\nPsychology has been split up into smaller parts called branches. These are subjects in psychology that try to answer a particular group of questions about how people think. Some branches of psychology that are often studied are:\nMethods.\nScientific approaches.\nPsychology is a type of science, and research psychologists use many of the same types of methods that researchers from other natural and social sciences use. \nPsychologists make theories to try to explain a behavior or pattern they see. Based on their theory they make some predictions. They then carry out an experiment or collect other types of information that will tell them whether their predictions were right or wrong. \nSome types of experiments cannot be done on people because the process would be too long, expensive, dangerous, unfair, or otherwise unethical. There are also other ways psychologists study the mind and behavior scientifically, and test their theories. Psychologists might wait for some events to happen on their own; they might look at patterns among existing groups of people in natural environments; or they might do experiments on animals (which can be simpler and more ethical to study).\nPsychology shares other things with natural sciences, as well. For example, a good psychological theory may be possible to prove wrong. Just like in any natural science, a group of psychologists can never be completely sure that their theory is the right one. If a theory can be proved wrong, but experiments do not prove it wrong, then it is more likely that the theory is accurate. This is called falsifiability.\nPsychologists use many tools as part of their daily work. Psychologists use surveys to ask people how they feel and what they think. They may use special devices to look at the brain and to see what it is doing. Psychologists use computers to collect data as they measure how people behave in response to pictures, words, symbols, or other stimuli. Psychologists also use statistics to help them analyze the data that they get from their experiments.\nSymbolic and subjective approaches.\nNot all psychology is scientific psychology. Psychodynamic psychology and depth psychology do things like interpreting people's dreams to understand the unconscious mind. They are older approaches to psychology begun by Carl Jung who was particularly interested in finding methods for measuring what kind of personality people have.\nHumanistic psychology and existential psychology also believe that it is more important to understand personal meaning than to find causes and effects of mental processes and behaviors.\nPsychologists.\nPsychologists are people who work in the field of psychology. A psychologist may work in either basic research or applied research. Basic research is the study of people or animals to learn more about them. Applied research is using what was learned from basic research to solve real-world problems. If he or she is qualified as a clinical psychologist they may be a therapist or counsellor as well as a researcher. \nTo become a psychologist, a person must first get a basic degree at a university and then go to graduate school. A Master's degree, either MSc (Master of Science) or MA (Master of Arts) allows work such as a school psychologist. A doctorate degree takes a longer time because it includes doing research and writing a detailed report called a dissertation or thesis. The doctoral graduate uses the initials PhD or DPhil (Doctor of Philosophy) after his or her name. Some clinical psychologists earn a Doctor of Psychology degree and use the initials PsyD after their name. The American Psychological Association says that people need a PhD (or PsyD) and a current state license in the U.S.) in order to call themselves a 'psychologist'.\nThe words \"psychologist\" and \"psychiatrist\" may be confused with each other. A \"psychiatrist\" has graduated from medical school and uses the initials MD or its equivalent (MB ChB in London University, for example). A psychiatrist or doctor may work with a psychologist: they may prescribe and check on the effect of medications."}
{"id": "6207", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6207", "title": "Louisiana", "text": "Louisiana () is a state in the Southern United States of America. It had a population of about 4,533,372 people in 2010. The state has a total area of about . Louisiana is the 25th largest state by population and the 31st largest state by area. Louisiana is also known by its nickname, \"The Pelican State\". The land that would become Louisiana was bought in the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. Louisiana became a state on April 30, 1812. It was the 18th state to become part of the United States. The people who live in the state are known as \"Louisianans\". The state's capital is Baton Rouge, and its largest city is New Orleans.\nLouisiana has coastal plains, marshs, and low ridges. All of the state is in the Sun Belt. Louisiana is in a sub tropical region, and has a diverse ecosystem. The climate of Louisiana Louisiana has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification Cfa). It has long, hot, humid summers and short, mild winters.\nOne third of the adults in Louisiana are obese. This is the highest rate in the United States.\nLouisiana was settled by France and the influence of French culture is still a big part of Louisiana today. The French Quarter in New Orleans is one of the best known attractions in the state. It is known today for its special culture, unique food, as well as the holiday Mardi Gras which is most famous in New Orleans.\nLouisiana was very badly damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Much of the New Orleans area lies below sea level making flooding a serious problem.\nLouisiana was first settled by Native Americans. Louisiana has a large Louisiana Creole population. Louisiana Creole people are a mixture of French, Native American and African American.\nCities.\nLouisiana contains 308 incorporated municipalities, consisting of four consolidated city-parishes, and 304 cities, towns, and villages. Louisiana's municipalities cover only 7.9% of the state's land mass but are home to 45.3% of its population. The majority of urban Louisianans live along the coast or in northern Louisiana. The oldest permanent settlement in the state is Nachitoches. Baton Rouge, the state capital, is the second-largest city in the state. The most populous city is New Orleans. As defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, Louisiana contains nine metropolitan statistical areas. Major areas include Greater New Orleans, Greater Baton Rouge, Lafayette, and Shreveport\u2013Bossier City."}
{"id": "6208", "revid": "369772", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6208", "title": "Synonym", "text": "A synonym is a word (or a phrase) which means the same thing as another word or phrase.\nExamples:\nSynonyms can be nouns, verbs, adverbs or adjectives, but both words must be of the same part of speech. That means, only a noun can be a synonym of another noun, only a verb can be a synonym of another verb, and so on.\nOne can find sets of synonyms in a thesaurus, which is a book listing groups of related words.\nSome words are near-synonyms, which have similar but not exactly the same meaning.\nHistory.\nThe word \"synonym\" dates back over 500 years, to late Middle English. The term is derived from Latin from the Greek word \"sun\u014dnumon\", neuter form (used as a noun) of the adjective \"sun\u014dnumos\", from \"sun-\" meaning 'with' + \"onoma\" meaning 'name' in the Greek language.\nThe meaning of the word has remained unchanged for all these centuries. There is even a saying, going back to 1892, \"Once a synonym, always a synonym\".\nThe word has been taught to generations of English-language students and is commonly known by the general public. Many other languages have a similar word for \"synonym\" with the same or similar spelling."}
{"id": "6212", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6212", "title": "Yosa Buson", "text": " was a Japanese Haiku poet and painter, usually referred to simply as \"Buson\". He is one of the greatest poets of the Edo period, comparable with Matsuo Basho and Kobayashi Issa.\nHe was born in Osaka, his real family name was Taniguchi (). From 1758, he began to live in Kyoto, and he stayed there for rest of his life. He got married when he was 45 years old, and became a father of his daughter Kuno ()."}
{"id": "6216", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6216", "title": "Sandbox", "text": "Sandbox could mean:\nIn computing:\nIn music"}
{"id": "6219", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6219", "title": "List of fruit", "text": ""}
{"id": "6221", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6221", "title": "Chopsticks", "text": "Chopsticks are sticks used in pairs as cutlery. Chopsticks are the traditional eating utensils of some countries including China, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, and Vietnam. They can be made of wood, gold, silver, ivory, bamboo, or plastic. Gold and silver chopsticks are considerably heavier than normal wooden chopsticks and also considered to be extravagant.\nToday chopsticks are mainly used in China and neighboring countries. Elsewhere, chopsticks are often used in restaurants serving oriental cuisines.\nHistory.\nChopsticks came from China as early as the Shang dynasty (1600\u20131100 BC). The creation of chopsticks might have been influenced by the teachings of Confucius. They were widely used throughout East Asia. Tools like chopsticks were also found in the archaeological site Megiddo in Israel. This discovery may mean there was some form of trade between the Middle East and Asia in early antiquity. Alternatively, such tools may have developed independently in both the Middle East and Asia. Chopsticks were also common household items of civilized Uyghurs on the Mongolian steppes during the 6th\u20138th centuries.\nOrigin of the word.\nThe English word \"chopstick\" seems to come from Chinese Pidgin English, a pidgin where \"chop chop\" meant quickly.\nThe Mandarin Chinese word for chopsticks is \"ku\u00e0izi\" (\u7b77\u5b50). It is a word made of different parts; it has the phonetic part of \"\u5feb\", which means \"quick\", and a semantic part, \u7af9, meaning bamboo. In Chinese, the old word for \"chopsticks\", and also in some varieties of modern Chinese such as Hokkien, was \"zh\u00f9\" (MC: ) (\u7bb8 Pinyin:\"zh\u00f9\", Minnan: \"t\u012b\"). However, \"zh\u00f9\" became a taboo on ships because it sounded the same as another word meaning \"to stop\" (\u4f4f). Consequently, it was replaced by a word of opposite meaning, \"ku\u00e0i\" (fast, quick). This gradually spread until it became the word for \"chopsticks\" in most varieties of modern Chinese. The character for this new meaning of \"chopsticks\" (\u7b77) for \"ku\u00e0i\" has the semantic element of bamboo added to the character meaning \"fast\" \"ku\u00e0i\" (\u5feb).\nIn Japanese, chopsticks are called \"hashi\", written . They are also known as . This is what is usually printed on disposable chopsticks.\nIn Korean, \u7bb8 (\"jeo\") is used in the compound \"jeotgarak\" (\uc813\uac00\ub77d) which is composed of \"jeo\" (chopsticks) and \"garak\" (stick). \"Jeo\" cannot be used alone.\nIn Vietnamese, chopsticks are called \"\u0111\u0169a\"\nEating with chopsticks.\nWhen people are eating with chopsticks they usually do not use a knife and fork. The sticks are held together in the same hand. Usually this is the right hand. At some formal occasions it may be considered rude to use chopsticks with the left hand.\nIf the tips do not line up, it will be difficult to hold things. Hold the chopsticks upright with one of the tips lightly touching the table, and gently push the chopsticks down or gently loosen your grip for a moment to let both tips become equal in length. You can also adjust your grip or holding position this way.\nWith practice, it is possible to perform step one and two right away, on picking up the chopsticks with one hand smoothly. Hold the chopstick at different angles if necessary in order to feel comfortable with two sticks between your fingers.\nTable manners.\nEtiquette.\nChopsticks are used in many countries; those eating with chopsticks generally observe the following rules:\nTypes of chopsticks.\nChopsticks are used in many countries. Chopsticks are sometimes different in those countries.\nOther uses for chopsticks.\nChopsticks are used in cooking to stir materials in a pan, or to help move meals.\nIn Japan, people use a single-use chopstick called \"waribashi\" (split chopstick). Before using, people split it into two. Japanese people also call their chopsticks \"hashi\". \nIn Japan, people use chopsticks during the funeral ceremony of Buddhists. After burning the dead, family and friends use chopsticks to move the burned bones of the dead from the coffin to a pot.\nProblems with chopsticks.\nChopsticks and the environment.\nUsing a set of chopsticks only once, and then throwing them away causes problems for the environment. There are some movements which aim at telling people to use a set of chopsticks more than once. In China, about 45 billion pairs of disposable chopsticks are used per year. This is equal to 1.7 billion cubic metres of timber\u2013about 25 million fully grown trees. China is the biggest producer of disposable chopsticks, about 60,000 people have a job making chopsticks. If production continues at the current level, China's forests will be gone in about a decade.\nFor this reason, a tax has been introduced on chopsticks that are only used once. There are also moves to replace disposable chopsticks made of wood by plastic or metal ones.\nChopsticks and health.\nIn 2003, a study was done. It found that people who use chopsticks regularly have a slightly higher risk of getting arthritis in the hand. With this, cartilage gets worn off, which causes pain in the joints of the hand. This is more common in older people. Another problem is that using certain kinds of chopsticks may lead to coughing or even asthma.\nThe Hong Kong Department of Health did a study in 2006. It found that generally, people use chopsticks or other food utensils more often than in 2003 when eating with others. It also found that personal hygiene has improved."}
{"id": "6222", "revid": "1141870", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6222", "title": "Telephone", "text": "A telephone, also known as a phone, is a communication tool. Originally it was an electric tool transmitting analogue speech along wires. Now it is an electronic tool sending digital signals on wires or radio transmission. Using a telephone, two people who are in different places can talk to each other. Early telephones needed to be connected with wires which are called fixed or landline telephones. Modern mobile phones use radio waves.\nHistory.\nAlexander Graham Bell was the first person to patent the telephone, in 1876. Early telephones were wired directly to each other and could only talk to the phone that they were connected to. Later, telephone exchanges allowed connecting to other telephones. During the 20th century the machines that made the connections were automated.\nTypes of telephones.\nThere are many different types of telephone. A telephone that can be carried around is called a mobile phone or cell phone. These became popular in the late 1980s. It has become common for people to carry mobile phones and in some places it is unusual to not have one. The majority are smartphones, which can be used as computers. Some mobile phones are able to make telephone calls using communications satellites instead of masts on the ground, which means people can make calls from anywhere in the world.\nIn most countries there are public payphones. To use one, people pay with coins, a credit card or a prepaid card.\nComputers can use a machine called a modem or a Digital subscriber line router to talk to other computers over a telephone line. This allows a computer to connect to other computer networks including the Internet. \nMost countries have a telephone network. The telephones in one place are connected to a telephone exchange. The exchanges are connected together in a world-wide network. In developing countries cell phones are used as a cheaper and faster way to connect the countryside to the network.\nTelephone number.\nMost telephones have their own number. Today, telephone numbers are about seven to ten digits long. In many countries, part of the telephone number is called the \"area code\". Area codes are used to make sure the numbers are not the same in two different places. Areas have their own area code, and countries have their own country code.\nUsage.\nBy the end of 2009, there were a total of nearly 6 billion mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers worldwide. This included 1.26 billion fixed-line subscribers and 4.6 billion mobile subscribers.\nLets make it easy,\ntelephone is a device that make people near as they are far from each other.\nTelephone can be used in emergency cases."}
{"id": "6225", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6225", "title": "Conceptual Metaphor", "text": ""}
{"id": "6226", "revid": "7822838", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6226", "title": "Checkers", "text": "Checkers or draughts is the name of several different board games. All of these games are similar. In every kind of checkers, the other player's pieces can be taken by being \"jumped\" over.\n\"Checkers\" is the American name. In British English, and in various other English-speaking nations, these games are called \"draughts.\"\nThe rules and championships are controlled by the World Draughts Federation.\nHistory.\nCheckers dates back certainly to the 12th century, in France. These authorities do not admit that discoveries of earlier checkerboards prove the game was played earlier, though it may have been. Some other writers have thought differently, but they were not professional historians.\nThere are two main types of checkers played: the Anglo-American version (which originally came from France) and the Polish or continental version. The Anglo-American version is played on an 8x8 checkerboard (chessboard) with 12 pieces. The continental version (so-called because it is played on the continent of Europe) is played on a 10x10 board with 20 pieces each. There are also a number of variations in various countries. \nRules.\nIn most games of checkers, there are two players. The players are at opposite ends of the board. One player has dark pieces, and one player has light pieces. They take turns moving their pieces. Players move their pieces diagonally from one square to another square. When a player jumps over their opponent's (the other player's) piece, you take that piece from the board. If you can take a piece, then you must take a piece.\nEnglish draughts.\nBritish people call the game \"draughts\". English draughts is played on an 8x8 chess board. Only the dark squares are used: the light squares are never used.\nA player can move in two ways. A piece can be moved forward, diagonally, to the very next dark square. If one player's piece, the other player's piece, and an empty square are lined up, then the first player \"must\" \"jump\" the other player's piece. The first player jumps over the other player's piece onto the empty square and takes the other player's piece off the board. \nA player can also use one piece to make multiple jumps in any one single turn, provided each jump continues to lead immediately into the next jump and in a straight line. Sometimes a player may have the option or a choice of which opponent piece he must jump. In such cases, he may then choose which to jump. If you keep your hand on any piece when you're moving, you have the choice to put it back and move another piece. "}
{"id": "6229", "revid": "7701172", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6229", "title": "Kobe, Hy\u014dgo", "text": "Kobe (Japanese: \u795e\u6238\u5e02; -shi) is a city in the Kansai region of Japan on the island of Honshu. It is the capital city of Hy\u014dgo Prefecture.\nKobe is an important port city in the Kansai district of Western Japan. It is between the country's financial capital Osaka and Kyoto. It's population is around 1.53 million people as of 2008.\nKobe is next to the Seto Inland Sea. Its northern part, including the Rokko mountain, is hilly. A ropeway runs from the Rokko district in its southern area through Rokko mountain to the Arima Spa. Transportation includes, the Shinkansen train service, highways and roads along the coast. Many cargo trucks and tankers use the port. There is a ferry between Shanghai and Kobe periodically.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAlready in the late 12th century powerful leader Taira no Kiyomori moved the capital of Japan from Kyoto to Fukuwara, nowadays the Fukuwara district of Japan. He planned for it to serve as a trade and political center of Japan. Kiyomori relied his political influence on the trade between Japan and China. But his plan failed and Kobe stayed a small village during a long time.\nLater history.\nThe area of Kobe was expanded and today it includes Mount Maya, Sumaura Park, Sumaike park with a good spa and the famous Arima spa. Arima spa is one of oldest spas in Japan, whose earliest record is found already in \"Nihonshoki\". Kobe is also famous for its Kobe beef, a very expensive meat delicacy.\nModern foundation.\nKobe was founded in 1868 as a port for serving foreign ships. In those days most ports in Japan were closed to foreigners. Many foreigners lived in Kobe, including: westerners, Chinese, Jews, and Indians. Kobe has one of the more important Chinatowns in Japan. People can find a synagogue and many Christian churches, too. Kobe is similar to Yokohama as a place from where modern international culture was introduced into Japan.\nEarthquake.\nOn January 17, 1995 a very powerful earthquake hit the city. Earthquakes are more common in other parts of Japan, but not in Kansai so this earthquake was a surprise for everyone. 6,434 people were killed in Kobe and its neighboring cities, and many more were injured. Many of the buildings were destroyed.\nIndustry.\nThe northern area of Kobe is an industrial area. There are many factories. Sake production in Nada district has been known from the Edo period. Nagata district in the southwest area of Kobe was a center of shoe production in Japan but production suffered because of destruction caused by the Earthquake."}
{"id": "6231", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6231", "title": "Oradea", "text": "Oradea (pronunciation in Romanian: , Hungarian: \"Nagyv\u00e1rad\", colloquially also \"V\u00e1rad\", German: \"Gro\u00dfwardein\", former , ) is the capital city of Bihor County, in Cri\u015fana, Romania. There are 206,527 people in the city according to the 2002 census. Oradea is one of Romania's richest cities. Oradea is near the Hungarian border, on the river Cri\u015ful Repede. There are many Hungarians in the city.\nEconomy (money, trade, and work).\n6.0% of people in Oradea are unemployed (they do not have work).\nEthnicity (different groups of people).\nIn the 20th century, the city changed from having a mainly Hungarian population to mainly Romanian.\nIn 2002, the people belonged to these ethnic groups (races):\nQuarters (parts of the city).\nThe city is made up of several areas. They are called quarters (\"cartiere\" in Romanian): \nVie.\nThe name \"Vie\" means vine in Romanian. It is the part of the city where the richest and most important people live. Vie is on the hills overlooking Oradea. Vie is popular with the elite (the powerful people) for two main reasons: it is close to Oradea, within walking distance of the railway station and the city centre; and it is peaceful and has fresh air. Vie has many mansions (big houses). In the north of Vie, at the top of the hills, there are also farms that grow grapes for making wine.\nVie also has the County Hospital of Oradea (Spitalul Judetean), the tuberculosis hospital (Spital TBC), and the mental (mind) hospital. In communist times, blocks of flats were built at the bottom of the hills.\nThe border between Vie and the city centre of Oradea is the railway station and railway tracks. Everything above the main railway station of Oradea is considered to be part of Vie. Despite its nearness to the railway station and Oradea, Vie is not easy to reach by public transport (except of course the part near the station), because many of its roads are unpaved (have a bad surface), and very steep. Some parts of the quarter are within walking distance of the railway station and the main supermarkets and shops of Oradea, but others are more only easy to get to by car. There is a bus service that serves the three hospitals in the region, and the houses among them.\nNuf\u0103rul.\nLike Rogerius, Nuf\u0103rul is like a mini-city, with supermarkets, large blocks of flats and more. It is on the eastern outskirts (the edge) of Oradea, and is near to B\u0103ile Felix, the famous spa resort. It is possible to get to Nuf\u0103rul by tram and bus. It is perhaps the fastest growing area, because of its position: many highways and national roads lead from Oradea to other Romanian cities and pass through Nuf&amp;atilderul. For example, Nuf\u0103rul was home to the second McDonalds (now there are many more) in Oradea, as well to many supermarkets that were not in central Oradea. Even though Nuf\u0103rul has a lively market and excellent transport, education and shopping, it is not as nice as central Oradea, because it was planned and rebuilt in communist times.\nThe name Nuf\u0103rul means water lily in Romanian. It has this name because there are many water lilies in the area.\nRogerius.\nRogerius is located at the western end of the city, near Bor\u015f, on the Hungarian border. It is the city's largest district other than the city centre, and is home to many communist-era housing estates, as well as a large market. You can get to Rogerius by tram from the city centre and other parts of Oradea, as well as by bus. It is also the first part of Oradea visitors will see when coming from Western Europe or Hungary through via Bor\u015f. The western part of Rogerius has factories from Communist times, including a chemical factory called \"Sinteza\".\nIosia.\nUnlike many of the other outer quarters of Oradea, Iosia does not have many large apartment blocks and is still fairly rural (like being in the country). It is located in the city's far southwest. The quarter is one of the most beautiful in Oradea, and has most of the facilities and amenities of the city. For tourists, it shows what Romanian country life is like while still being in the city close to all the excellent facilities that Oradea is home to.\nTransport (getting around).\nThere is a public transport system run by \"Regia Autonom\u0103 Oradea Transport Local\". There are three tram lines and some bus routes. The city has three train stations: central, Vest and Est. Vest Station is in the quarter of Io\u015fia, and the central station (called simply Oradea) is in the city centre, near the quarter of Vie.\nArchitecture (buildings).\nThe city has many Baroque buildings. It was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire many times in history.\nAttractions.\nThe city centre is beautiful and worth visiting, as well as many other sites:\nThere are around 100 churches in Oradea, and three synagogues (Jewish places of worship). Only one of the synagogues is still being used. Oradea also has the biggest Baptist church in Eastern Europe"}
{"id": "6235", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6235", "title": "Henry Ford", "text": "Henry Ford (July 30, 1863 \u2013 April 7, 1947) was an American engineer and businessman. He started making cars in 1896 and founded the Ford Motor Company.\nHe developed the idea of a system in which each worker has the duty to do one small part of the process of making something. His idea made it possible to produce cars in large numbers. This was called the assembly line.\nMany factories around the world still make things this way. It was quite innovative at the time and it allowed him to produce many cars quickly and at a cheaper price than other car companies could. He married Clara Bryant and had one child named Edsel Bryant Ford. Ford left home for Detroit, Michigan to start his mechanical career.\nBeginning of the Ford Motor Company.\nIn 1903, Henry Ford helped start the Ford Motor Company. He was the owner of the company. The company sold its first car which was the model T car on July 23, 1903. Ford became president of the company in 1906.\nIn 1908, Ford's company began making the Ford Model T car. Ford said that he wanted to make a \"motor car for the great multitude\". This meant that he thought that most Americans should be able to afford to buy a car and not just a few rich people. In order to reach this goal, he chose to make the design as simple as possible. All his cars would be made the same way. They were even all the same color \u2013 black.\nIt cost $850 to buy a Model T car. Even though that was a lot of money back then, it was still very cheap for a car. Many people wanted to buy Model T cars. In fact, so many people wanted to buy them that Ford was having a hard time making enough cars to sell one to everybody who wanted to buy one.\nThe assembly line.\nFord helped develop an idea, not much used before his time, called the assembly line, and started using it in his factories in 1913. Because of the assembly line, making new cars would not take as long. He put a moving belt in his factory. Cars moved along the belt, and workers put on one part at a time. Each worker would only be responsible for putting one part on cars.\nThe assembly line was a big success. Cars did not take as long to make, and they were cheaper to buy now, too. By 1916, it only cost $360 to buy one of Ford's cars, and more than three times as many people were buying his cars now. The Ford Model T changed America. It made it easier for people to live in the city instead of the country.\nPolitical views.\nFord was also known for his political views. He had been against World War I because he thought that it was a waste of time. He also believed that Jewish people were causing problems in the world. This belief is called Anti-Semitism. In 1919, he took over a newspaper called the \"Dearborn Independent\". He began publishing articles that blamed Jews for problems in the world. Later, he would blame Jewish bankers for starting World War II."}
{"id": "6236", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6236", "title": "George Orwell", "text": "George Orwell (25 June 1903\u00a0\u2013 21 January 1950) was an English dia during the British Empire's rule of India. He is best known for two novels that he wrote in the late 1940s, \"Animal Farm\" and \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". In those works, he said that totalitarianism, especially Stalinism, was very bad.\nOrwell fought in the Spanish Civil War with the antifascist troops. These troops were against the dictatorship of fascist governments.\nOrwell died of tuberculosis in London.\nEarly life.\nEric Arthur Blair was born on 25 June 1903, in India. His great-grandfather Charles Blair was a rich gentleman who had married Lady Mary Fane, and he owned slaves and plantations in Jamaica. His grandfather, Thomas Richard Arthur Blair, was a clergyman. His father, Richard Walmesley Blair, worked in the Indian Civil Service. His mother, Ida Mabel Blair, grew up in Burma. He had a younger sister Avril and an older sister Marjorie. When Eric was one year old, Ida took him to England.\nEric grew up with his mother and sisters. Except for a short visit, he did not see his father again until 1912. The family moved to Shiplake before World War I. There, Eric became friends with the Buddicom family, especially Jacintha Buddicom. They read poetry and hoped to become famous writers. At this time, he also liked fishing and watching birds with Jacintha's brother and sister.\nWhen he was five, Eric was sent to a Catholic convent school where Marjorie went. His mother wanted him to go to public school, but his family was not rich enough to pay for it. Ida's brother, Charles Limouzin, was asked to help find the best school to help Eric prepare for better things. He suggested St Cyprian's School in Eastbourne, Sussex. Limouzin, who was a good golfer, came to know the school and its headmaster at the Royal Eastbourne Golf Club. The headmaster helped Blair win the scholarship to pay for his education. He also let Blair's parents pay only half the usual amount of money. However, Blair hated the school."}
{"id": "6237", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6237", "title": "Genghis Khan", "text": "Genghis Khan (c. 1167 \u2013 August 18, 1227) was a Mongolian ruler who became one of the world's most powerful military leaders, who joined with the Mongol tribes and started the Mongol Empire. He was a Mongol Emperor who was very successful in battles, conquering many other peoples such as the Jin Dynasty. He was a very strong and powerful emperor who occupied much of China and some surrounding countries of China. His children and his grandchildren started the largest empire in the world. Genghis Khan's grandson, Kublai Khan, was the first ever emperor of the Yuan Dynasty (1271\u20131368) in China. \nGenghis Khan's real name was Tem\u00fcjin which means \"iron worker\". Because of his military success people referred to him as Genghis, meaning \"Universe ruler\". Many people were killed by his armies and he gained a reputation as a \"brutal monster\". Genghis Khan died in the Liupan Mountains in northwestern China, in Aug. 1227 His burial site is unknown.\nEarly life.\nLineage.\nTem\u00fcjin was related on his father's side to Khabul Khan, Ambaghai and Qutula Khan who had headed the Mongol confederation. When the Chinese Jin Dynasty switched support from the Mongols to the Tatars in 1161, they destroyed Khabul Khan. Genghis's father, Yes\u00fcgei (leader of the Borjigin and nephew to Ambaghai and Qutula Khan), emerged as the head of the ruling clan of the Mongols, but this position was contested by the rival Tayichi\u2019ud clan, who descended directly from Ambaghai. When the Tatars grew too powerful after 1161, the Jin switched their support from the Tatars to the Keraits. When Yes\u00fcgei was poisoned, Tem\u00fcjin who was only 13, became leader.\nBirth.\nBecause of the lack of records, there is very little information about the early life of Tem\u00fcjin. The few sources that provide insight into this period often conflict.\nTem\u00fcjin was born in 1162 into an influential family who were part of a Mongol tribe near Burkhan Khaldun mountain and the Onon and Kherlen Rivers in modern-day Mongolia, not far from the current capital Ulaanbaatar. The Secret History of the Mongols reports that Tem\u00fcjin was born with a blood clot grasped in his fist, a sign that he was destined to become a great leader. He was the second-oldest son of his father Yes\u00fckhei, a minor tribal chief of the Kiyad and an ally of Ong Khan of the Kerait tribe, and the oldest son of his mother Hoelun. According to the Secret History, Tem\u00fcjin was named after a Tatar chieftain whom his father had just captured. The name also suggests that they may have been descended from a family of blacksmiths.\nYes\u00fckhei's clan was called Borjigin (\u0411\u043e\u0440\u0436\u0438\u0433\u0438\u043d), and Hoelun was from the Olkhunut, the sub-lineage of the Onggirat tribe. Like other tribes, they were nomads. Because his father was a chieftain, Tem\u00fcjin was of a noble background. After his death his third son Ogodei succeeded him. He had four queens, and Ogodei was born from his first wife.\nReputation.\nAs a ruler, Genghis lowered taxes and got rid of taxes for doctors, teachers and priests. He created the first international postal system. His empire was not known to be greedy with their loot; instead he would spread the wealth among the conquering Mongolians. Temujin eradicated torture, and held no prisoners; instead he merely killed his enemies. In doing so, he became respected. He completely re-made the feudal system to disregard people\u2019s ethnicity and instead based it on loyalty and accomplishments. He gave his people religious freedom, unlike empires that limited their people to one religion.\nThese benefits were enjoyed by those who surrendered immediately to the Mongol invaders. Those populations that resisted would be massacred as a warning to other towns and cities. These massacres were a method of psychological warfare to terrify those not yet conquered. The terror endured, and helped color the historical portrayal of the Mongols.\nPhysical appearance.\nNo accurate portraits of Genghis Khan exist, and any surviving depictions of him are considered to be artistic interpretations. Persian historian Rashid-al-Din recorded in his \"Chronicles\" that the legendary \"glittering\" ancestor of Genghis was tall, long-bearded, red-haired, and green-eyed. Rashid al-Din also described the first meeting of Genghis and Kublai Khan, when Genghis was shocked to find that Kublai had not inherited his red hair. Also according to al-Din, Genghis's Borjigid clan had a legend involving their origins: it began as the result of an affair between Alan-ko and a stranger to her land, a glittering man who happened to have red hair and bluish-green eyes. Modern historian Paul Ratchnevsky has suggested in his Genghis biography that the \"glittering man\" may have been from the Kyrgyz people, who historically displayed these same characteristics. Controversies aside, the closest depiction generally accepted by most historians is the portrait currently in the National Palace Museum in Taipei, Taiwan (see picture above)."}
{"id": "6238", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6238", "title": "Joseph Stalin", "text": "Joseph Stalin (born as Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili) (18 December 1878 \u00a0\u2013 5 March 1953) was a Georgian politician who became leader of the Soviet Union from 1922 until his death in 1953 from a cerebral haemorrhage. He replaced Vladimir Lenin as leader of the Soviet Union. His ideas and policies turned the Soviet Union into a powerful, relatively modern country, as the largest on Earth. His way of thinking was called Marxism-Leninism, and his form of government was later called Stalinism.\nStalin invaded Poland on 18 September 1939. In the subsequent World War II, Stalin stayed neutral but signed a peace deal with Germany's leader Adolf Hitler. He then led a bloody war after Germany invaded the Soviet Union. And after the end of the war Stalin gained control of all Eastern Europe including part of Germany. There, a series of loyal Marxist-Leninist single-party states were set up, extending his power and determining the Soviet Union's position as a superpower.\nStalin's name.\nStalin was born as Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili or Iosif Dzhugashvili. He began calling himself \"Stalin\" in 1912.\nEarly life.\nIoseb Vissarionovich Jugashvili was born in a small one room house in Gori, Georgia. His father made and repaired shoes. His father was often drunk and used to hit his wife and his son until his death in a fight in 1890. Joseph had smallpox when he was young. This left his face scarred. Later, photographs were often changed to hide the scars. His left arm was also shorter because of an accident. He was educated at the Gori church school. Stalin studied to be a priest at a seminary (school for priests) in Tbilisi. He was an active student reading many books, especially books that were not allowed by the seminary. This included books by Karl Marx. He joined a Marxist group in 1898, the Mesame Dasi, or Group Three.\nRevolutionary.\nStalin left school in 1899 and got a job at the Tbilisi Physical Institute. He joined groups that were trying to start a revolution to remove the Tsar. They wanted a different type of government. The police raided his house in 1901 while hunting for people who opposed the government. Stalin escaped but went into hiding so the police could not find him. He organized anti-government activities such as May Day marches and protests. He became a Bolshevik. He supported a violent revolution, and did not support the Mensheviks. The secret police caught him in April 1902 and exiled him without trial to Siberia. He lived in the village of Novaya Uda.\nHe soon escaped from Siberia. This led to many later claims that he was a police spy. The arrest of another Bolshevik, Stephan Shaumyan, a rival of Stalin, increased these beliefs. At the end of 1905, he went to a meeting in Finland and met Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. Lenin was not what Stalin had expected. The government arrested and exiled Stalin several times in the next ten years. This increased his power in the Bolshevik party and he was elected to the Central Committee of the party in 1912. He was promoted to a position at St.Petersburg.\nSecretary.\nStalin was a member of the Bolshevik Party, but did not do much in the Russian Revolution of 1917. He was writing and editing Pravda, the party newspaper. He had a number of organizational jobs in the Communist Party. In 1922 he became General Secretary. He was able to give jobs to people he liked in the Communist Party. These supporters helped him become the leader after Vladimir Lenin died in 1924.\nFood and agriculture.\nStalin tried to collectivize farms. \"Collectivization\" meant taking the land from owners of all farms and joining it into large farms run by the government. Communist officials then let farmers work the new farms and told them to turn the harvest over to the government.\nCollectivization did not work well. There was a famine 1932\u201333, in which millions died. Because farmers were not paid much money, and whatever they grew went to the state, the workers did not try their best. The best farming worked on very small bits of land given to the peasants to grow what they liked. On these pieces of land, farmers could keep what they grew. In 1938 these parts of land were 4% of Soviet farmland. However, they grew 20% of its produce.\nThere was a second great famine in the Soviet Union in 19461947. The conditions were caused by drought, made worse by the devastation caused by World War II. The grain harvest in 1946 totaled 39.6 million tons - barely 40% of the yield in 1940.\nMass executions.\nTo eliminate \"enemies of the working class\", Stalin instituted the \"Great Purge\". Over a million people were imprisoned and at least 700,000 executed between 1934 and 1939. Those executed included most of the generals in the Red Army, whom Stalin saw as a threat to his rule. This greatly weakened the army in the early months of the Wehrmacht's offensive against the Soviet Union in 1941.\nWorld War II.\nStalin cooperated with German Nazi leader Adolf Hitler. They signed a mutual non-aggression pact. However, Hitler hated communism. After invading and neutralising France, Germany attacked the Soviet Union. After the Operation Barbarossa invasion, the USSR began working with the Western Allies to defeat Germany. In the end, Germany lost, but the USSR had more casualties than any other country during the war.\nWhen World War II was over, the Soviet army occupied many countries in Europe, such as Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and part of Germany. They imposed Marxism-Leninism on these countries. This was done against the wishes, and over the protests, of the American and British governments.\nStalin continued to rule over the Soviet Union until he died. He also militarized Russia by focusing the country's time and energy towards weapons, vehicles, and the armed forces.\nDeath.\nStalin died on March 5, 1953. It was officially said to be because of a stroke. In 2003 a group of Russian and American historians said that Stalin had been poisoned with powerful rat poison warfarin, possibly by the men who took over the government after Stalin died. Bear in mind, however, that Stalin was in his mid-seventies when he died, and modern pharmacology was in the future (statins etc). Those facts make it likely that his death was natural.\nLed by Lavrentiy Beria, the leading group in the Kremlin were Vyacheslav Molotov and Georgy Malenkov and Nikita Krushchev. Much later, Krushchev began a process of \"De-Stalinization\", which meant taking apart much of the political system that Stalin made. Stalin was denounced as a tyrant. After outsmarting and defeating his rivals, Krushchev established a personal control over the government comparable to Stalin's own. Krushchev is himself a fascinating figure in Soviet history. His attempts to expand Soviet influence ended with the Cuban missile crisis.\nLegacy.\nStalin is a controversial figure in history. Many historians see him as a ruthless dictator, though some praise him as the Father of the Soviet State. Stalin has been criticized for his role in the Holodomor. A recent poll in Russia (2008) listed him as the third most popular person in Russian history. In 2006, a poll stated that almost half the adults in Russia thought Joseph Stalin was a good person."}
{"id": "6239", "revid": "7786121", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6239", "title": "Antigua and Barbuda", "text": "Antigua and Barbuda is an island nation in the eastern Caribbean Sea on the boundary with the Atlantic Ocean. Antigua and Barbuda are part of the Lesser Antilles archipelago. In 2011, about 81,800 people lived there. The capital and largest port and city is St. John's, on Antigua. The country used to be a part of the British Empire. The nation still belongs to the British Commonwealth.\nDivisions.\nAdministration.\nAntigua and Barbuda is divided into six parishes and two dependencies:\nNote: Though Barbuda and Redonda are called dependencies, they are important parts of the state. Dependency is simply a title.\nCities.\nBelow is a list of the ten largest cities. For other cities see List of cities in Antigua and Barbuda.\nIslands.\nBelow is a list of the islands of the country.\nEconomy.\nTourism is the main part of the economy. It is more than half of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Antigua is famous for its many luxury resorts. Investment banking and financial services are also important.\nMilitary.\nThe Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force has 285 members.\nLanguages.\nEnglish is the official language, but many of the locals speak Antiguan Creole. The Barbudan accent is slightly different from the Antiguan."}
{"id": "6240", "revid": "1143240", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6240", "title": "San Marino", "text": "San Marino is one of the smallest countries in the world. It is found in southern Europe and is fully surrounded by Italy (this is called an \"enclave\", and only the Vatican City, Lesotho and San Marino are like this). Fewer than 30,000 people live there. Its total area is 61\u00a0km2. Its capital is the City of San Marino.\nSan Marino is the world's oldest republic that still exists. It was started on 3 September in A.D. 301 by a skilled builder called Saint Marinus. Its written constitution was adopted on October 8, 1600. The very small nation was recognized by Napoleon's France in 1797, and by the other European nations at the 1815 Congress of Vienna.\nEven though it is an independent country, it depends very much on Italy. Since the 19th century, when Italy was unified, San Marino has been fully surrounded by Italy.\nThe biggest industry in San Marino is tourism. Selling postage stamps is an important source of income, too. San Marino is not a member of the European Union, but the euro is used in San Marino.\nPeople in San Marino speak the Italian language. Most people in San Marino believe in Roman Catholicism.\nHistory.\nSaint Marinus left the island of Rab (today Croatia) with his lifelong friend Leo, and went to the city of Rimini to work as a stonemason. After the Persecution of Diocletianus following his Christian sermons, he escaped to the nearby Monte Titano. There he built a small church and founded what is now the city and state of San Marino.\nThe official founding date is 3 September 301 BCE. In 1320 the community of Chiesanuova chose to join the country. In 1463 San Marino extended with the communities of Faetano, Fiorentino, Montegiardino, and Serravalle. Since then there have been no changes in the country's borders.\nIn 1503, Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander VI occupied the Republic for six months. It remained like that until Pope Julius II intervened and restored the country's independence.\nGeography.\nSan Marino is covered by the Apennine mountain range, and it has a rugged terrain. The highest point in the country is Monte Titano. There are no bodies of water of any significant size. San Marino has no natural level ground. It is hilly terrain.\nSan Marino is the third smallest country in Europe, Only Vatican City and Monaco are smaller.\nTwo rivers flow through San Marino. There is no major water transport, and no major port or harbour.\nMunicipalities.\nThese are the 9 \"castelli\" (municipalities) of San Marino:\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of San Marino is very similar to Italian, especially the cuisine of the Emilia-Romagna and Marche regions. It has a lots of its own unique foods. It's best known food is the \"Torta Tre Monti\" (\"Cake of the Three Mountains\" or \"Cake of the Three Towers\"), a wafer cake covered in chocolate. The country also has a small wine industry."}
{"id": "6250", "revid": "39458", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6250", "title": "Philippe's", "text": "Philippe's is a sit-down restaurant in downtown Los Angeles, California, U.S.A.. It is at 1001 North Alameda Street, near Olvera Street. Phillippe's is famous for inventing the French dip sandwich (though another restaurant called \"Cole's\" claims to have invented it, too). It has been in business since 1908, and is the oldest operating restaurant in Los Angeles. The traditional meal served at Phillippe's is a French dip sandwich, a bag of potato chips, a soft-drink (preferably root beer or cola), and a tapioca pudding cup for dessert."}
{"id": "6251", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6251", "title": "Orbit", "text": "An orbit is the path that an object takes in space when it goes around a star, a planet, or a moon. It can also be used as a verb. For instance: \u201cThe earth \"orbits\" around the Sun.\u201d The word \u2018revolves\u2019 has the same meaning, but 'rotates' is the spin of the object.\nMany years ago, people thought that the Sun orbits in a circle around the earth. Every morning the Sun came up in the east and went down in the west. It just seemed to make sense that it was going around the earth. But now, thanks to people like Copernicus and Galileo Galilei, we know that the Sun is the center of the Solar System, and the earth orbits around it. Isaac Newton discovered that gravity controls the orbit of the planets and moons. Since a satellite is an object in space that revolves around another object, the earth is a satellite of the sun, just like the moon is a satellite of the Earth! The sun has lots of satellites orbiting around it, like the planets, and thousands of asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. The Earth just has one natural satellite (the Moon), but there are many artificial satellites orbiting the earth.\nWhen people first began to think about orbits, they thought that all orbits had to be perfect circles, and they thought that the circle was a \"perfect\" shape. Copernicus and Galileo, for example, thought so. But when people began to study the motions of planets carefully, they saw that the planets were not moving in perfect circles. Some of the planets have orbits that are almost perfect circles, and others have orbits that are more oblong (egg shaped).\nOrbital period.\nAn \"orbital period\" is the time that it takes for one object - that is, satellite - to orbit around another object. For instance, the Earth's orbital period is one year: 365.25 days. (The extra \".25\" is why we have a leap day once every four years).\nThe Moon takes 27 days (29.53 days as seen from Earth) to go around the Earth and also to rotate around its own axis. This is why only one side always faces the Earth and the \"dark side of the Moon\" faces away (it is called dark because we cannot see it, though all sides of the moon get equal light). One lunar year and one lunar day take the same amount of time.\nElliptical and eccentric orbits.\nJohannes Kepler (lived 1571-1630) wrote mathematical \"laws of planetary motion\", which gave a good idea of the movements of the planets because he found that the orbits of the planets in our Solar System are not really circles, but are really ellipses (a shape like a \"flattened circle\"). That is why orbits are described as elliptical. \nThe more elliptical an orbit is, the more eccentric the orbit is. This is called orbital eccentricity. Other numbers that describe an elliptical orbit include semi-major axis and orbital inclination.\nIsaac Newton (lived 1642-1727) used his own ideas about gravity to show why Kepler's laws worked the way they did. Joseph-Louis Lagrange further advanced the study of orbital mechanics, using Newton's theory to predict perturbations which change the shapes of orbits."}
{"id": "6253", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6253", "title": "Funeral", "text": "A funeral is a ceremony that is held because someone has died. A funeral is a gathering of friends and family of the dead person. They will mourn the dead person, meaning that they will feel and show sadness that the person has died, and also say thanks for the life the person had. A funeral is usually held with the dead body present but hidden in a coffin, but there are also open casket funerals. During the funeral, or soon after it, the dead body will be buried, cremated (burned) or made to disappear in some other way. A memorial service or celebration of life is a funeral in which the dead body is not present.\nPurpose.\nFunerals are held in all human cultures. Religion is an important part of funeral customs in most countries. At many funerals, they say a prayer for the dead so that his or her soul may rest in peace and have a good time in the afterlife.\nThere are other reasons why funerals are held. Many of them are to do with helping the dead person's friends and family (the mourners):\nModern funerals have greatly changed over time. Present day funeral or memorial services may often be more like a thanksgiving for the life of the dead person, rather than just thinking about the sadness of death.\nFuneral traditions.\nA funeral ceremony can be held at a church, a temple, a public building for holding funerals or in many other places.\nIn North America, it is common for there to be a \"visitation\" (also called a \"viewing\" or a \"wake\") a few days before the funeral. This is where people are invited to see the dead body.\nIn Madagascar, people have a ritual called famadihana or \u201cthe turning of the bones\u201d in English. Once every five or seven years, family members exhume the remains of their ancestors. They clean the bones and spray them with perfume or wine. They take the skeleton back home to dance with it and introduce it to the younger generation.\nAccording to Balinese Hindu tradition, the soul of the deceased restarts the rebirth cycle once it is free through cremation. Balinese cremation, or Ngaben, uses an open pyre to incinerate the corpse. The whole memorial often has a festive atmosphere, focusing on celebrating the life of the departed loved one.\nSeveral things often happen at a funeral in a Western country:\nAt many present day funerals there is a video tribute played before, after, or during the funeral service. Memorial folders or prayer cards are handed out at many funeral services and this, too, is a way to make a funeral service personal. At funerals it is not uncommon to see a \"life reflection\" table. Family members sometimes bring favorite pictures or other reminders of the dead person. There are lots of different traditions that different religions use."}
{"id": "6254", "revid": "1051124", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6254", "title": "Georgian Uprising of Texel", "text": "The Georgian Uprising of Texel (5 April 1945 \u2013 20 May 1945) was an insurrection (a rebellion, or mutiny, when soldiers disobey their orders) by Soviet Georgian soldiers on the island of Texel. The uprising was against the Germans army who had taken over the Dutch island during the Second World War. The event is sometimes described as \"Europe's last battlefield\".\nThe island was very important in the German Atlantic Wall \u2013 the line of defences along the Atlantic coast. It was strong and had many defences. The Georgians were soldiers from the Soviet Republic of Georgia who had been captured (taken prisoner) on the Eastern front. They were now fighting for the Germans so that they did not have to stay in camps for prisoners. Their job was to help the German troops.\nOn the night of 5\u20136 April 1945 they thought that the Allies would land soon. They took over the island and killed 400 German soldiers. Some parts of the island stayed under German control and the Georgian soldiers could not capture them. More Germans were able to come to the island to help defeat the Georgians. After a few weeks of very tough fighting the Germans took control of the island again.\nUnfortunately the British and Canadians, who were warned of the events on Texel by escapees who fled by boat to England, did not believe them, and did not take any action in order to stop the fighting. \nOn Texel this is called the \"Russian war\". Approximately 800 Germans, 500 Georgians, and 120 Tesselans (people from the island) were killed. Lots of farms were burned. Even after the Germans surrendered (gave up) in the Netherlands and Denmark on 5 May 1945, and after the full German surrender on 8 May, the fighting continued. Canadian soldiers stopped the fighting on 20 May.\nThe Georgian survivors did not have a happy ending. They were sent back to the Soviet Union. Stalin said that because the soldiers had been captured by the Germans, they had not fought until they died, so they were traitors. Some of the two million Soviet prisoners who were sent back to the Soviet Union by the Allied forces after the end of the war were executed (killed) when they got there. \nA museum at the airport on the island tells the story of this event."}
{"id": "6255", "revid": "1096125", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6255", "title": "Neutrino", "text": "Neutrinos are a type of elementary particle that exist all across the universe. The word \"neutrino\" means a small neutral particle. Physicists study these particles, but they are hard to find because they have a very small chance of interacting with regular matter. (For example, they usually pass through the whole earth without touching any other particles). Neutrinos travel near the speed of light.\nNeutrinos are very difficult to detect. They are very unlikely to collide (interact) with other particles as they travel through space or through matter. Electrons have an electric charge, but neutrinos do not. This means that neutrinos are unaffected by the electromagnetic force. The first detectors built to find neutrinos observed only 10 or 15 each year. Recent detectors use tanks that contain about a thousand tons of water or other liquid, which lets them detect about 10 to 100 neutrinos per day.\nNeutrinos are generated in particle accelerators, in the sun, in other stars, and in nuclear reactions such as in nuclear reactors. They are generated whenever there is a nuclear reaction in the form of beta decay. This process starts off with one neutron, and ends with one electron, one proton, and one neutrino.\nWe used to think that neutrinos have no mass, but a few years ago physicists found that they have a very small mass, much lighter than electrons. By finding neutrinos, we can learn about the structure and the history of the universe. Since most of them pass easily through sun, physicists have learned about the reactions in the center of the sun that make the sun's heat, by detecting the neutrinos that come out from the sun's center.\nThe three types of neutrinos are named after the three leptons that have electric charge. There is the electron neutrino (ve), the muon neutrino (v\u00b5), and the tau neutrino (v\u03c4). Each neutrino has an antiparticle, called an antineutrino. Therefore, there is an electron antineutrino, a muon antineutrino, and tau antineutrino.\nThe three types of neutrinos change into each other over time, so an electron neutrino could turn into a muon or tau neutrino and then back again. This is called neutrino oscillation. This oscillation was suggested when then number of electron neutrinos from the Sun was measured in the 1960s, and the amount was only about a third of what theories at the time said there should be. The result of neutrino oscillation is that most of the electron neutrinos made in the Sun change to another type of neutrino .\nMost neutrinos passing through the planet Earth come from the Sun. About 65\u00a0billion () solar neutrinos per second pass through every square centimeter of area, including our own bodies. \nThis is true even on the night side of Earth, because nearly all the neutrinos from the sun pass easily through the Earth."}
{"id": "6257", "revid": "823563", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6257", "title": "Play (theatre)", "text": "A play is a piece of writing (literature) which can be seen at a theatre or on television, or heard on the radio. Plays often show conversations between people. A play is usually watched, rather than being read.\nThe people who appear in a play are actors; in a theatre they stand on a stage so the people watching (the audience) can see them better. A director helps the actors to work better, or tells them how he wants the play to be.\nPlays can be very interesting because they can be understood in many different ways. When the writer - the playwright - makes the play, he can not say how the actors or director will use it. Sometimes the playwright is also the director or an actor: Moli\u00e8re, for example, was often an actor in his plays. But the director can change the play in different ways: the actors' costume, the music, how people say things, how they move or what they hold. Modern directors can direct plays by Shakespeare, and these old plays seem modern now, too.\nThere are many sorts of plays, but there are six important sorts:\nSymbolic can also be called expressionistic. Its all about how the writer or director presents ideas in a very different point of view."}
{"id": "6258", "revid": "385", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6258", "title": "Planetoids", "text": ""}
{"id": "6259", "revid": "644977", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6259", "title": "Phrasal verb", "text": "Phrasal verb is the name given to an English verb which is composed of two or three words. One verb is combined with a preposition (like \"on, in, under)\" or an adverb (like \"up, down, away\"). Sometimes a phrasal verb can have a meaning that is very different to the meaning of at least one of those two or three words separately. Some text books call these verbs multi-word verbs. Phrasal verbs are used more frequently in everyday speech than in formal, official writing or speaking. \nHere are some examples:\n\"Maria didn't know the word, so she\" looked it up \"in the dictionary.\"\n\"Oh no, we've\" run out of \"milk! I'll have to buy some more.\"\n\"Farmers have to\" get up \"early in the morning.\"\n\"The rocket\" took off \"with a loud roar.\"\nOften these phrasal verbs have a one-word equivalent in other languages. \nIn Spanish, to get up can be translated as \"levantarse\", in French as \"se lever\" etc.\nTypes of phrasal verbs.\nThere are four different types of phrasal verbs.\nThese are:\nInstead of \"separate\" or \"separable\", some text books use the word \"split\" or \"splittable\".\nA useful piece of advice to confused students of English is this:\nIf you do not know if a phrasal verb is separable or inseparable ALWAYS use a noun or noun phrase and do not try to separate the verb."}
{"id": "6261", "revid": "3311650", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6261", "title": "Flavour", "text": ""}
{"id": "6262", "revid": "516", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6262", "title": "Licence", "text": ""}
{"id": "6263", "revid": "11594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6263", "title": "Aeroplane", "text": ""}
{"id": "6264", "revid": "516", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6264", "title": "Programme", "text": ""}
{"id": "6265", "revid": "516", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6265", "title": "Sulpher", "text": ""}
{"id": "6266", "revid": "516", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6266", "title": "Tyre", "text": ""}
{"id": "6272", "revid": "630", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6272", "title": "Phrasal Verbs", "text": ""}
{"id": "6276", "revid": "7427753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6276", "title": "Season", "text": "A season is a part of a year. Many areas of the Earth have four seasons in a year: spring, summer, autumn (British English) or fall (US English), and winter. \nIn some areas, there are a different number of seasons. For example, the tropical parts of Australia (the northern parts of Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory) have wet and dry seasons. These are in addition to, or replace the regular season names.\nIn places which are tropical and subtropical, there are two seasons: the rainy (or wet, or monsoon) season and the dry season. This is because the rain changes more than the temperature.\nSummer is a warm season because the days are longer and the Sun is high in the sky, giving direct light to the ground. Winter is a cold season because the days are shorter and the Sun is low in the sky, giving indirect light to the ground. Both the changes in the length of the day and the height of the Sun at noon are caused by the tilt of the Earth's spin axis with respect to the plane of the Earth's path around the Sun. At any time, in any season, the northern and southern hemispheres (halves of the Earth) have opposite seasons.\nDates.\nSeasons begin and end on different dates in different countries. In the United States, people say the seasons begin at the solstices and equinoxes. The summer solstice is the longest day of the year, and the winter solstice is the shortest. The equinox is the time when the day and the night are the same number of hours, assuming the sun were a point of light at its center. Since civil dawn occurs when the edge of the sun first appears over the horizon and civil dusk occurs when the edge drops over the horizon, the civil length of day is 12 hours long several days prior to the equinoxes. In the USA, summer begins at summer solstice, winter at winter solstice, spring at the spring (\"vernal\") equinox and autumn at the autumnal equinox.\nIn Britain, people traditionally say that the seasons begin about seven weeks earlier: spring begins on Candlemas (February 2), summer on May Day (May 1), autumn on Lammas (August 1), and winter on All Hallows (November 1). These are near the cross-quarter days halfway between the solstices and the equinoxes. The Irish calendar is similar, but Spring begins on February 1.\nIn Denmark, spring begins on March 1, summer on June 1, autumn on September 1 and winter on December 1. In Australia, summer begins on December 1, autumn on March 1, winter on June 1, and spring on September 1.\nIn the Chinese calendar and the Northern parts of India, the solstices and equinoxes are in the middle of each season. Summer happens in the hemisphere tilted towards the sun.\nHigh season.\nHigh season is the time of year that people travel. During high season hotels and resorts increase their prices because demand is higher than in offseason. For example, winter is high season for skiing; summer is high season for beaches."}
{"id": "6277", "revid": "5468060", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6277", "title": "Carisbrooke Castle", "text": "Carisbrooke Castle is the Isle of Wight's only remaining medieval castle. It was built on a Roman site. The castle earthworks were begun in 1070. \nThe shell keep was built on the site some 70 years later. None of the Norman domestic buildings now remain. The gatehouse with its drum towers dates from the 14th and 15th centuries.\nIn 1377 the French landed on the island but the castle was not attacked.\nDuring Elizabethan times the threat of a Spanish invasion was avoided when the Spanish Armada was turned away at a nearby battle. However, the castle was considerably altered to resist the new artillery. Outer lines of defence were built enclosing the old castle. The curtain walls, bastions, and bulwarks remain in good condition to this day.\nCharles I was held as prisoner at the castle in 1647. An attempt to escape failed when he got stuck in the bars.\nLater the castle was the occasional residence of the governor of the Isle of Wight and it became home to Princess Beatrice, youngest daughter of Queen Victoria, when she was governor."}
{"id": "6278", "revid": "508885", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6278", "title": "Atlantis", "text": "Atlantis is a name for a fictional large island or small continent that was (in the legend) in the Atlantic Ocean many years before it sank into the depth of the sea .\nThe name Atlantis first appears in the writings of Herodotus - he describes the western ocean as \"Sea of Atlantis.\" Then, one generation later, Atlantis is described in detail in the stories Timaeus and Critias by the Greek philosopher Plato. He used this story to help explain his ideas about government and philosophy. Plato was the only ancient writer who wrote specific things about Atlantis.\nAccording to Plato, the Atlanteans lived 9000 years before his own time and were half human and half god. They created a very good human society. When they stopped being good people and did bad things, the gods sent earthquakes and fire to destroy Atlantis.\nMany scholars think Plato could have been thinking of a real place when he wrote about Atlantis. Many, many people have thought of many, many places where the real place that inspired Atlantis could have been. For example, there was a Minoan kingdom on the island of Santorini. The Minoan kingdom was very powerful thousands of years before Plato, and their society was damaged when a volcano erupted on their island. According to Plato, Atlantis was very large, as big as North Africa, so it should not have been hard to find.\nAfter the discovery of the Americas, some people in Europe thought they might be Atlantis. However, after Plato, the idea of Atlantis was mostly forgotten until 1882, when a writer named Ignatius Donnelly wrote a book saying that Atlantis was real and that the culture of Atlantis had started many other ancient cultures, such as the Egyptian and Mayan. Then other people became interested in Atlantis. \nAtlantis has appeared in many works of fiction. In Marvel Comics, Atlantis is at the bottom of the ocean and exists in modern times, with people who breathe water. Other works of fiction use Atlantis as background. For example, Robert E. Howard set his Conan the Barbarian stories in a fictional time called the Hyborian Age, which began with the destruction of Atlantis and ended when real written history started."}
{"id": "6281", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6281", "title": "Comparative", "text": "Adjectives and Adverbs can be comparative in English and some other languages. When people are talking about two or more nouns, they can compare them (say the differences between them). The word which explains how they compare is called the comparative. They can also compare actions using adverbs.\nExamples: (The comparative is in bold).\nMany words can be made into a comparative by adding \"er\" to the end of the word. \nWords that end with the letter 'Y' can still be made into a comparative, but people change the 'Y' to an 'I' and then add 'ER'.\nSome words cannot be made into a comparative by adding 'ER' Instead we use the word more in front. Most of these words have three or more syllables, such as \"beautiful\", \"reliable\". \nIf people are not sure about a word, it is always acceptable to say \"more\" (something), such as \"more beautiful\", \"more expensive\".\nWarning: The 'ER' ending and the word \"more\" together cannot be used. "}
{"id": "6284", "revid": "516", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6284", "title": "US English", "text": ""}
{"id": "6285", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6285", "title": "US", "text": ""}
{"id": "6292", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6292", "title": "Asbestos", "text": "Asbestos is a set of six silicate minerals which occur naturally. White asbestos makes up 95% of the asbestos found in buildings. It occurs in all parts of the world. It is fibrous, heat resistant and non flammable. These properties made it very attractive as a component in building materials and other products such as insulation and automobile brake pads. People have used asbestos throughout history. Ancient Egyptian people used asbestos. Asbestos is extremely dangerous for human health, as it can cause lung diseases such as asbestosis, emphysema and mesothelioma if the fibres get loose in the air. It can also harm animals such as livestock or pets.\nAsbestos was linked to lung cancer in the early 1970s, and was replaced by other materials in most applications by 1980.\nHow to Remove Asbestos\nWhen thinking about how to remove asbestos, it is important to follow these simple steps:\nTypes of asbestos.\nThere are six types of asbestos:"}
{"id": "6293", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6293", "title": "Syllable", "text": "A syllable is a unit of pronunciation uttered without interruption, loosely, a single sound. All words are made from at least one syllable.\n\"Monosyllables\" are words that have only one vowel sound; \"polysyllables\" have more than one. If a syllable ends with a consonant, it is called a \"closed syllable\". If a syllable ends with a vowel, it is called an \"open syllable\". Patterns of syllables can be shown with C and V (C for 'consonant', V for 'vowel'). Closed syllables are often shown as \"CVC\" (such as \"got\"), and open syllables as \"CV\" (such as \"go\"). Some languages like English have many kinds of closed syllables. Other languages, like Japanese, have few kinds of closed syllables. Other languages still, like Hawaiian and Swahili, have no closed syllables. \nNotice that the consonant (C) and vowel (V) notation does NOT match the letters of English spelling in a one-to-one relationship (e.g. 'th' is one sound), but rather individual sounds.\nThere are many words in English that have only one syllable. \nIPA has been added in slashes.\nHowever, in several languages, such as English, syllables can have consonant clusters (having multiple consonants next to each other), which easily allow for words to have much more complicated syllables, such as:\nThere are many more words that have two or more syllables.\nSome languages do not use an alphabet with letters. Instead, each sign may stand for a syllable. For example: Japanese can be written using Kana. A writing system based on syllables is called a syllabary. Since words in languages like English can have many different complex syllables (well over 10,000 can be produced in English), writing such languages using a syllabary would be completely impractical, thus alphabets are much better suited to write languages with complex syllable structures. However, since words in Japanese can be made with just a few simple syllables (around 90), writing such languages are well suited for the type of language."}
{"id": "6294", "revid": "603365", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6294", "title": "Umbrella", "text": "An umbrella is a hand tool that is used to stop rain from falling on a person. It is also used to make shade and protect people from sunlight. An umbrella made for protection from the sunlight is called a parasol. And a plastic umbrella is cheap but it is fragile."}
{"id": "6295", "revid": "48755", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6295", "title": "Usenet", "text": "Netnews is a kind of online service that shares postings between a group of computers over a network. One kind of netnews is called usenet. Usenet was started in 1980, before the World Wide Web and is still very active today. Usenet provided a way for people to write postings on many different topics and share them with people all over the world. Postings are sent to all the computers in the community. This differers from a posting on a webserver, which stays on one computer until a person gets it with their web browser.\nThe community of computers comprising a Usenet typically does not include those of end users, e.g. home personal computers. Rather, that community consists of a group of cooperating servers. End users must have access to a member of the server community to read and post. Such access is typically achieved through the news feature of their email program or web browser or through a special program that specializes in netnews. Configuring the program requires the URL of a server, and often a user ID and password.\nThe servers in the Usenet community are independent in the sense that each gets to decide what portions of the Usenet they will serve to their users and how long postings will last on the server. For example, some servers may leave out the adult groups. Because postings have to be transmitted from computer to computer, a given posting takes some time to be available on all servers. Further, they may disappear from active groups on busy servers in a matter of days or weeks.\nBecause Usenet groups are frequently used to share large files, servers may have bandwidth and download limits. If you use a commercial service, it may offer a range of limits at different prices.\nQuery your Internet Service Provider to determine whether their servers are members of the Usenet community or whether they provide free access to one of the commercial services that offers access. You may have to seek out your own commercial service because many providers have their own alternative. AOL and MSN have their Communities; AT&amp;T uses Yahoo! Groups.\nA netnews service may not even be a community of computers. Any user could configure their personal computer to offer a netnews service. Organizations often offer their own netnews service independent of Usenet to support their customers and members. For example, news.microsoft.com is a very large community of Microsoft users and developers that help each other out.\nNetnews groups have a long history and their own netiquette. Look for FAQ and netiquette postings to see the rules for any given group.\nGroups may be moderated or unmoderated. Expect a lot of off topic and potentially offensive material on the unmoderated groups, which are the majority of Usenet."}
{"id": "6296", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6296", "title": "Netnews", "text": ""}
{"id": "6298", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6298", "title": "Diagonal", "text": "Diagonal is a kind of straight line. A diagonal line does not go straight up, down, or across. It is a line that connects two corners of a shape. \nIn mathematics, \"diagonal\" has different meanings. For example, in geometry a diagonal is any line that goes between the corners of a polygon. So a square has two diagonals, and a five-sided shape has five diagonals. In general the count of diagonal can be identified by a formula [n(n-3)]/2 where n is the total number of sides of shapes."}
{"id": "6300", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6300", "title": "Kwashiorkor", "text": "Kwashiorkor is a health condition of poor nutrition from not having enough protein in the diet. If a person uses up energy from carbohydrates (starches) and lipids (fats), their body may begin to use protein for energy. \nThe body breaks down protein into energy that can be used. They then do not have enough protein for other needed bodily functions such as growth and building tissues like bones. Usually this is a condition of children from aged 1 to 5 years, but rarely adults and older children get it. It is common in poor places in Africa. Symptoms include having a pot belly, swollen face, and hair that is dark then light then dark. This can be cured by having a protein- rich diet.\nKwashiorkor comes from a protein deficiency (lack) in the diet. Body parts becomes swollen due to an accumulation of water in the spaces between the body's cells. Other symptoms are poor muscle development, swollen legs, puffy face, difficulty in eating, diarrhea, and dry skin are the symptoms of this disease."}
{"id": "6302", "revid": "385", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6302", "title": "Archduke Ferdinand", "text": ""}
{"id": "6303", "revid": "4619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6303", "title": "Chemical", "text": ""}
{"id": "6304", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6304", "title": "Gills", "text": ""}
{"id": "6305", "revid": "1044885", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6305", "title": "Popocat\u00e9petl", "text": "Popocat\u00e9petl (also called El popo or Don Goyo) is an active volcano. The volcano is the second highest mountain in Mexico after Pico de Orizaba (5,610m). It is high . \nHistory.\nPopocat\u00e9petl is the Aztec word for \"Smoking Mountain\". Popocat\u00e9petl was an Aztec warrior who loved Iztacc\u00edhuatl. Iztacc\u00edhuatl's father sent Popocatepetl to war in Oaxaca. He promised him his daughter as his wife if he returned (which Iztacc\u00edhuatl's father thought he would not). Iztacc\u00edhuatl's father told her that her lover had died in battle. She died of sadness. When Popocat\u00e9petl returned, and found out about the death of his lover, he killed himself by stabbing a knife into his heart. The gods covered them with snow and changed them into mountains. Iztacc\u00edhuatl's mountain was called \"La Mujer Dormida, (the \"Sleeping Woman\"), because it looks like a woman sleeping on her back. Popocat\u00e9petl became the volcano Popocat\u00e9petl, raining fire on Earth in anger at the loss of his lover.\nEruptions.\nPopocatepetl has had more than 20 big eruptions since the arrival of the Spanish in 1519. A major eruption happened in 1947. On December 21, 1994 the volcano threw out gas and ash which was carried as far as 25 km away by the wind. This led to people having to leave nearby towns. Scientists began to check the volcano for an eruption.The way scientists checked the volcano was by implementing 10 composite monitoring stations around the volcano, including broadband seismometers, thermal surveillance cameras, tiltmeters, electronic distance meters, lahar acoustic detectors and other instruments. In December 2000, tens of thousands of people were made to leave the area by the government based on the warnings of scientists. The volcano then made its largest display in thousands of years. The most recent eruption which was this year didn't have any injuries. Since it was so near Mexico City so many cameras were recording this eruption. Officials recorded that the eruption had a column of smoke that went as high as 2 miles into the air, with moderate ash content.\nReferences.\nDe la Cruz-Reyna, Servando, et al. \u201cTectonic Earthquakes Triggering Volcanic Seismicity and Eruptions. Case Studies at Tungurahua and Popocat\u00e9petl Volcanoes.\u201d Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, vol. 193, no. 1, 2010, pp. 37\u201348.\nhttps://earthsky.org/earth/volcano-popocatepetl-eruption-mexico-jan-9-2020"}
{"id": "6306", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6306", "title": "Lourve", "text": ""}
{"id": "6308", "revid": "7085795", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6308", "title": "North Sea", "text": "The North Sea is a sea that is part of the Atlantic Ocean in northern Europe. The North Sea is between Norway and Denmark in the east, Scotland and England in the west, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and France in the south.\nBorders.\nThe Skagerrak connects the North Sea to the Baltic Sea. In the south, the North Sea becomes the English Channel, a sea between England and France. This is called the Dover Straits and is very busy with ships.\nThe border between the North Sea and the Skagerrak is at an imagined line between Lindesnes in Norway, and Hanstholm in Denmark. In the North, the North sea is open towards the Atlantic. The border between the two is an imagined line from Northern Scotland, to Shetland, and then to \u00c5lesund in Norway. According to the Oslo-Paris Treaty of 1962 it is a bit more to the west and the north though. The treaty puts it at 5\u00b0 East longitude, and 62\u00b0 North latitude. That is at the parallel of the Geirangerfjord in Norway.\nVarious statistical data.\nOn average, the North Sea has a depth of only 94 meters. About 80 million people live near the North Sea, at most 150\u00a0km away from the coast. Together with the English Channel in the south, the southern North Sea is the busiest body of water in the world.\nRivers that drain into it.\nWell-known rivers that drain into the North Sea include the Tay (at Dundee), the Forth (at Edinburgh), the Tyne (South Shields), the Wear (at Sunderland), the Tees (near Middlesbrough), the Elbe (at Cuxhaven), the Weser (at Bremerhaven), the Rhine and Meuse or Maas (at Rotterdam), the Scheldt (at Flushing or Vlissingen), the Thames, and the Humber (at Hull), and the river Nairn (at Nairn)\nThe Kiel Canal, one of the world's busiest artificial waterways, connects the North Sea with the Baltic.\nName.\nIts name comes from its relationship to the land of the Frisians (see Frisia). They live directly to the south of the \"North Sea\", and to the west of the \"East Sea\" (\"Oostzee\", the Baltic Sea), the former \"South Sea\" (\"Zuiderzee\", today's IJsselmeer) and the today reclaimed \"Middle Sea\" (\"Middelzee\"). But the spread of the name could also be from the view of the cities of the Hanseatic League. Some of its main cities, like L\u00fcbeck, Bremen or Hamburg had the same view.\nIn classical times this body of water was also called the \"Oceanum Germanicum\" or \"Mare Germanicum\", meaning German Ocean or Sea. This name was commonly used in English and other languages along with the name \"North Sea\", until the early eighteenth century. By the late nineteenth century, \"German Sea\" was a rare, scholarly usage even in Germany. In Danish the North Sea is also named \"Vesterhavet\" (besides \"Nords\u00f8en\"), meaning \"Western Ocean\" because it is west of Denmark.\nGeographic divisions.\nMost of the North sea is on the European Continental shelf. On average, the depth is about 93 to 94 meters only. In the south it is very shallow, only 25 to 35 meters. In the north in the bathyal zone north of Shetland, this depth increases to between 100 and 200 metres. In the south, the depth is at most 50 metres. An exception to this is the Norwegian Trench. It is deepest there, with a depth of 725 metres. The most shallow part of it is a sand bank called Dogger Bank. In the southern part, there are many sand banks.\nLooking at the satellite picture it is easy to see the geographic divisions of the North Sea:\nThe southern north sea is composed of the Southern Bight, before the coast of Belgium and the Netherlands and the German Bight before the coastline of Germany. The Dogger Bank is the limit between the southern and central parts. The Waddenzee runs all the way from Den Helder in the Netherlands to Esbjerg in Denmark.\nThe Dogger Bank covers an area about half the size of the Netherlands. There, the North Sea has a depth of between 13 and 20 metres only. The area is very famous for fishing. With some storms there are even waves breaking there.\nThe Norwegian Trench has an average depth of around 250 to 300 metres; at the entrance to the Skagerrak, the depth increases up to 725 meters. Along the trench is the Norwegian Current, which brings most of the waters of the North Sea into the Atlantic Ocean. Also, most of the waters of the Baltic Sea flow northwards here.\nAbout 200\u00a0km east of the Scottish city of Dundee there are more trenches, known collectively as the \"Devil's hole\". Generally, the water is about 90 meters deep there. The trenches very often are only a few kilometers in length. In these trenches, the depth increases to up to 230 meters.\nIn the Dover Strait the water is about 30 meters deep. At the end of the English Channel, this depth increases to about 100 meters.\nHistory.\nIn the last ice age the North Sea was covered by large areas of ice called glaciers. About 20,000 years ago the ice melted and the North Sea was formed (made).\nNorth Sea oil.\nIn the 1960s, geologists found large areas of oil and natural gas under the North Sea. Most of the oil fields are owned by the United Kingdom and Norway but some belong to Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany. Drilling began in the 1960s and led to a famous argument between England and Scotland about how the revenue (money) from the oil should be spent.\nAnimal life.\nPeople have been fishing in the North Sea for thousands of years. However, so many fish are now caught there that new ones may not be able to grow fast enough to keep the fishery going.\nTerns, Atlantic puffins, razorbills, kittiwakes and other seabirds live on the North Sea coast. Many coastal areas are protected nature reserves."}
{"id": "6309", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6309", "title": "Letter", "text": "In languages that use an alphabet, for example English, each symbol in the alphabet is a letter. Letters represent sounds when the language is spoken.\nSome languages do not use letters for writing: Chinese, for example, uses \"ideograms\". \nIn English and many other languages, the smallest part of writing is the letter. We use letters to make words. In some languages, for example Spanish, there is usually one letter for one sound (or better: for one \"phoneme\", the smallest part of speech). This is easy to read. In other languages, for example English, we can use several different letters for the same sound in different words, or one letter for different sounds in different words. This is difficult for learners to read. Here are some examples:\nEnglish, French, Spanish and many other languages use the Latin alphabet for writing. In this alphabet there are often two different letters for a sound. For example, \"A\" and \"a\". In other alphabets, for example the Cyrillic alphabet, there is only one letter for a sound (except for handwritten Cyrillic, in which the shape of the capital letter is much different - and usually unrecognisable - from its lowercase counterpart). The letters are: ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ\nTypes of letters.\nVarious scripts.\nThere are about twenty-six alphabets currently, with Arabic, Cyrillic, and Roman in widest use. The following alphabets, abjads, and individual letters are discussed in related articles. Each represents a different script:\nAssamese alphabet:\u0985, \u0986, \u0987, \u0988, \u0989, \u098a, \u098b, \u098f, \u0990, \u0993, \u0994, \u0995, \u0996, \u0997, \u0998, \u0999, \u099a, \u099b, \u099c, \u099d, \u099e, \u099f, \u09a0, \u09a1, \u09a2, \u09a3, \u09a4, \u09a5, \u09a6, \u09a7, \u09a8, \u09aa, \u09ab, \u09ac, \u09ad, \u09ae, \u09af, \u09f0, \u09b2, \u09f1, \u09b6, \u09b7, \u09b8, \u09b9, \u09a1\u09bc, \u09a2\u09bc, \u09af\u09bc, \u09ce, \u0982, \u0983, \u0981\nArabic alphabet: (Alphabetical from right to left) , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , .\nArmenian alphabet: \u0531, \u0532, \u0533, \u0534, \u0535, \u0536, \u0537, \u0538, \u0539, \u053a, \u053b, \u053c, \u053d, \u053e, \u053f, \u0540, \u0541, \u0542, \u0543, \u0544, \u0545, \u0546, \u0547, \u0548, \u0549, \u054a, \u054b, \u054c, \u054d, \u054e, \u054f, \u0550, \u0551, \u0552, \u0553, \u0554, \u0555, \u0556.\nSyriac alphabet: (Alphabetical from right to left) \u0710, \u0712, \u0713, \u0715, \u0717, \u0718, \u0719, \u071a, \u071b, \u071d, \u071f\u071f, \u0720, \u0721\u0721, \u0722\u0722, \u0723, \u0725, \u0726, \u0728, \u0729, \u072a, \u072b, \u072c.\nCyrillic script: \u0410, \u0411, \u0412, \u0413, \u0414, \u0415, \u0416, \u0417, \u0418, \u0406, \u041a, \u041b, \u041c, \u041d, \u041e, \u041f, \u0420, \u0421, \u0422, \u0423, \u0424, \u0425, \u0426, \u0427, \u0428, \u0429, \u042a, \u042b, \u042c, \u042e, \u042f.\nGeorgian script: \u10d0, \u10d1, \u10d2, \u10d3, \u10d4, \u10d5, \u10d6, \u10d7, \u10d8, \u10d9, \u10da, \u10db, \u10dc, \u10dd, \u10de, \u10df, \u10e0, \u10e1, \u10e2, \u10e3, \u10e4, \u10e5, \u10e6, \u10e7, \u10e8, \u10e9, \u10ea, \u10eb, \u10ec, \u10ed, \u10ee, \u10ef, \u10f0\nGreek alphabet: \u0391, \u0392, \u0393, \u0394, \u0395, \u0396, \u0397, \u0398, \u0399, \u039a, \u039b, \u039c, \u039d, \u039e, \u039f, \u03a0, \u03a1, \u03a3, \u03a4, \u03a5, \u03a6, \u03a7, \u03a8, \u03a9.\nHebrew alphabet: (Alphabetical from right to left) \u05d0, \u05d1, \u05d2, \u05d3, \u05d4, \u05d5, \u05d6, \u05d7, \u05d8, \u05d9, \u05db, \u05dc, \u05de, \u05e0, \u05e1, \u05e2, \u05e4, \u05e6, \u05e7, \u05e8, \u05e9, \u05ea.\nLatin alphabet: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z.\nHangul: \u3131 \u3132 \u3134 \u3137 \u3138 \u3139 \u3141 \u3142 \u3143 \u3145 \u3146 \u3147 \u3148 \u3149 \u314a \u314b \u314c \u314d \u314e \u314f \u3150 \u3151 \u3152 \u3153 \u3154 \u3155 \u3156 \u3157 \u3158 \u3159 \u315a \u315b \u315c \u315d \u315e \u315f \u3160 \u3161 \u3162 \u3163\nBopomofo: \u3105 \u3106 \u3107 \u3108 \u3109 \u310a \u310b \u310c \u310d \u310e \u310f \u3110 \u3111 \u3112 \u3113 \u3114 \u3115 \u3116 \u3117 \u3118 \u3119 \u311a \u311b \u311c \u311d \u311e \u311f \u3120 \u3121 \u3122 \u3123 \u3124 \u3125 \u3126 \u3127 \u3128 \u3129 \u312d\nOgham: \u1680 \u1681 \u1682 \u1683 \u1684 \u1685 \u1686 \u1687 \u1688 \u1689 \u168a \u168b \u168c \u168d \u168e \u168f \u1690 \u1691 \u1692 \u1693 \u1694 \u1695 \u1696 \u1697 \u1698 \u1699 \u169a \u169b \u169c\nEthiopic \u1200 \u1208 \u1210 \u1218 \u1220 \u1228 \u1230 \u1240 \u1260 \u1270 \u1280 \u1290 \u12a0 \u12a8 \u12c8 \u12d0 \u12d8 \u12e8 \u12f0 \u1308 \u1320 \u1330 \u1338 \u1340 \u1348 \u1350 \nTifinagh (Amazigh alphabet) : \u2d30, \u2d31, \u2d5b, \u2d37, \u2d39, \u2d3b, \u2d3c, \u2d33, \u2d33\u2d6f, \u2d40, \u2d43, \u2d49, \u2d4a, \u2d3d, \u2d3d\u2d6f, \u2d4d, \u2d4e, \u2d4f, \u2d53, \u2d44, \u2d56, \u2d45, \u2d47, \u2d54, \u2d55, \u2d59, \u2d5a, \u2d5c, \u2d5f, \u2d61, \u2d62, \u2d63, \u2d65.\nInternational Phonetic Alphabet - used to represent exact pronunciation\nFor other writing systems and their letters, see List of writing systems."}
{"id": "6311", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6311", "title": "Napoleon Bonaparte", "text": ""}
{"id": "6312", "revid": "7815310", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6312", "title": "Anne Frank", "text": "Annelies Marie Frank (12 June 1929 in Frankfurt am Main \u2013 February 1945 in Bergen-Belsen) is one of the most famous Jewish people who died in the Holocaust. Her diary is seen as a classic in war literature, and is one of the most widely read books today. Several plays and movies have been made about it.\nAnne was born in the city Frankfurt am Main in Weimar Germany. She lived most of her life in or around Amsterdam, in the Netherlands. She was officially seen as a German until 1941. This was when she lost her nationality because of the anti-Semitic rules of Nazi Germany. She became famous around the world after her death when her diary was printed. In it she described her experiences hiding during the Nazi German occupation of the Netherlands in World War II.\nThe Frank family moved from Germany to Holland's capital, Amsterdam in 1933. This was the same year that the Nazis grew powerful in Germany. By the beginning of 1940, because of the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands, the Frank family was trapped in Amsterdam. Persecution of Jewish people increased in July 1942, and the family decided to hide. They hid in some secret rooms of her father Otto Frank's office building. After two years, they were betrayed and taken to concentration camps. Anne and her sister, Margot, were later taken to the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp. There, they both died from typhus in February 1945.\nOtto Frank was the only person in his family who survived. He went back to Amsterdam after the war and found that Anne's diary had been saved. He helped print a version of it in 1947. It was translated from Dutch and first printed in English in 1952 as \"The Diary of a Young Girl\". It has been translated into many languages. The diary had been given to Anne on her 13th birthday. In it she wrote of her life from 12 June 1942 until 1 August 1944.\nAnne Frank was born on 12 June 1929 in Frankfurt, Germany. She was the second daughter of Otto Frank (1889\u20131980), a German businessman, and Edith Frank-Holl\u00e4nder (1900 \u2013 45). Margot Frank (1926\u201345) was her older sister. The Franks were Jews, and they lived with many Jewish and non-Jewish citizens. Anne and Margot grew up with Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish friends. The Frank family did not follow all the customs of Judaism. Edith Frank was very religious, though her husband was more interested in studying. He had a large library, and both parents encouraged the children to read.\nOn 13 March 1933, elections were held in Frankfurt, and Adolf Hitler's Nazi Party won. Acts of Antisemitism began almost immediately. The Franks were afraid of what might happen to them if they stayed in Germany. Therefore, later that year, Edith and the children went to Aachen. They stayed there with Edith's mother, Rosa Holl\u00e4nder. Otto remained in Frankfurt, but after getting an offer to start a company in Amsterdam, he moved there to begin the business and to find a place to live with his family. The Franks were included in the 300,000 Jews who ran away from Germany between 1933 and 1939.\nOtto Frank began working at the Opekta Works. Opteka was a company that sold pectin. Otto Frank found an apartment on the Merwedeplein (Merwede Square) in Amsterdam. By February 1934, Edith and the children had arrived in Amsterdam, and Anne and Margot began going to school. Margot went to public school and Anne went to a Montessori school. Margot enjoyed math, while Anne preferred reading and writing. Her friend Hanneli Goslar later remembered that from when she was young, Anne often wrote, though she tried to hide what she wrote and did not like talking about it. Margot and Anne had very different personalities. Margot was polite, quiet, and thoughtful, while Anne was brave, energetic, and friendly.\nIn 1938, Otto Frank started a second company, Pectacon. Pectacon sold herbs, salts and mixed spices that were used to make sausages. Hermann van Pels worked at Pectacon as a helper about spices. He was a Jewish butcher. In 1939, Edith's mother came to live with the Franks. She stayed with them until she died in January 1942.\nIn May 1940, Germany invaded the Netherlands. The government began to hurt Jews by making rules and laws about their freedom. The Frank sisters were both studying well and had many friends. But a new law that Jewish children could only go to a Jewish school made them move to a Jewish school. The companies that Otto Frank worked at still gave him some money, but they became poorer. It was not enough to support their family.\nBefore hiding.\nFor her 13th birthday on 12 June 1942, Anne Frank got a book she had shown her father a few days before. It was actually an autograph book with red-and-white cloth and a small lock on the front, but Anne decided to use it as a diary. She began writing in it almost immediately. Most of her first writings are about normal parts of her life, but she also wrote about some other things.\nIn July 1942, the Zentralstelle f\u00fcr j\u00fcdische Auswanderung (Central Office for Jewish Emigration) ordered Margot Frank to come to be taken to a work camp. Otto Frank told his family that they would hide in rooms above and behind the place where his company worked on the Prinsengracht. The Prinsengracht was a street next to one of Amsterdam's canals, where some of his most trusted employees would help them. The notice to Margot made them move a few weeks earlier than they had expected.\nHiding.\nAnne's father, Otto Frank, was scared that the Nazis would find him and his family which he needed to protect, he then spoke to some of the people who worked in his business. One of them was a young woman of about 33 years old, and was named Miep Gies. He told her he needed help - he was going to turn the top floor of his business into a secret hiding place for himself and his family called \"The Secret Annex\". Miep and the others would have to help them keep their secret, and bring them food. They hid in their secret hiding place for two whole years, without being discovered by the Nazis. Anne Frank left all her other belongings in Frankfurt.\nMiep agreed to help. In 1942, the Frank family, together with the Van Pels (And their son Peter) and a dentist named Fritz Pfeffer, moved into the Secret Annex that they had prepared. They planned to stay there until the end of the war. They hoped the war would end soon, but it did not. They spent around two and a half years in their hiding place, never able to go out into the sunshine. During the day, the family had to be very quiet, because the business continued downstairs, and not all the workers knew that the Frank family was in hiding in the upper part of the building.\nA few months before the Franks went into hiding, Anne was given a diary, for her birthday. She called her diary \"Kitty\" and wrote in it about all the things that were happening to her and to her family. Anne was only a young girl, but she knew how to write beautifully. She wrote about all the things that young girls think about - how she was getting along with her friends and parents, boys (pretty much Peter), her life and emotions. After a while, Anne had one strong ambition, she aspired to be a writer. She hoped to write a book that everyone would read.\nA total of 78 families lived hiding in the same building which was a total of 700 people.\nAfter 2 years a thief had come and took not much, but after about two and a half years in hiding, not long before the end of the war, the thief was caught and, in exchange of not going to jail or death, he told the Nazis that a Jewish family - the Franks - were in hiding. Nazi soldiers came into the Frank's secret hiding place. They sent the Franks and the others to a concentration camp. Miep Gies found Anne's diary and put it into a drawer. She wanted to keep it safe until after the war. She hoped that Anne would return, and she would be able give her her diary back to her.\nHowever, that was not to be. Anne's father, Otto Frank, lived through the war and came back to Amsterdam. He hoped that his family had survived too - but they had not. Of all the family, only he survived. His wife was killed at Auschwitz. Anne and her older sister, Margot, died at Bergen-Belsen concentration camp from typhus, a disease - only a month before the camp was freed by the Allied forces. When he got out, he found Anne's diary and published it.\nDiary.\nWhen World War II ended, Miep Gies gave Otto Frank Anne's diary and a bundle of notes. Otto Frank then decided to publish her diary to commemorate her.\nMiep Gies was with Otto Frank when he got the letter telling him that his two daughters were dead. Now she knew that Anne would never return for her diary. She went to the drawer where the diary was kept, and she gave it to Otto Frank. People who were close to Anne read the diary. They told Otto Frank that he should publish it. Anne had wanted to be a famous writer. Now, people would be able to read her book, and they would also learn about the difficult time that the Jews had during the war, and about the wonderful people who helped them.\nOtto had Anne's diary printed. It became one of the world's most widely-read books. It has been printed in over 60 languages, and people across the world have read and enjoyed this true story. Today, for an admissions fee, you can visit the house in Amsterdam where Anne Frank and her family hid during the war. You can also see the diary that she wrote."}
{"id": "6313", "revid": "41053", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6313", "title": "Rhine", "text": ""}
