{"id": "20365", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20365", "title": "Gunpowder Plot", "text": "The Gunpowder Conspiracy of 1605 was a plan to murder King James I of England and VI of Scotland. Other names for the plot are The Powder Treason or The Gunpowder Plot. A group of Catholics wanted to blow up the Houses of Parliament during the State Opening of Parliament on 5 November 1605. This would have killed the king, and most of the Protestant aristocracy.\nThe conspirators also planned to kidnap the royal children, and lead a popular revolt in the Midlands.\nOrigins.\nRobert Catesby led the planning of the conspiracy, which started in May 1604. The people who helped him were either rich Catholics, or gentry families who had a lot of influence. Catesby may have come up with the plot when he saw that there was little hope that Great Britain would become more tolerant to Roman Catholics, under King James I. Many Catholics were disappointed about the situation. It is more likely though that Catesby simply wanted to give the Catholics in England a chance: The plot was to be the first step of a rebellion. Afterwards, James' nine-year-old daughter (Princess Elizabeth) could be put in as a Catholic head of state.\nOther plotters were Thomas Winter (also spelled Wintour), Robert Winter, John Wright, Christopher Wright, Robert Keyes, Thomas Percy (also spelled Percye), John Grant, Ambrose Rokewood, Sir Everard Digby, Francis Tresham and Thomas Bates (Catesby's servant). The explosives were prepared by Guy \"Guido\" Fawkes, a man with 10\u00a0years military experience. Fawkes had fought with the Spanish against the Dutch in the Spanish Netherlands.\nThe main Jesuit in England, Father Henry Garnet was said to know the details of the plot. Oswald Tesimond, a fellow Jesuit had told him. Robert Catesby confessed them to Tesimond, and gave him the permission to tell Garnet. Although he was convicted, there has since been some debate over how much Garnet really knew. As the details of the plot were known through confession, Garnet was not allowed to reveal them to the authorities. He did not think it was a good idea. Nevertheless, the plot went ahead. Garnet's opposition to it did not save him from being hanged, drawn and quartered for treason in 1606, though.\nPlanning.\nIn the 17th century, the Palace of Westminster was made of many buildings, spread over a large area. They were grouped around the medieval chambers, chapels, and halls of the old royal palace. This palace housed both Parliament and the various law courts. The palace was also easier to access than it is today. Merchants, lawyers, and other people lived and worked on the palace grounds.\nAs a member of the King's Bodyguard, Percy was able to lease rooms next to the House of Lords, in May 1604. The plotters' original idea was to dig their way under the foundations of the Lords chamber to put the gunpowder there. The main idea was to kill James, but many other important targets would be present, including most of the Protestant nobility and senior bishops of the Church of England. Guy Fawkes, as \"John Johnson\", was put in charge of this building, where he posed as Percy's servant. Catesby's house in Lambeth was used to store the gunpowder with the tools for digging.\nHowever, the Black Plague came back to London in the summer of 1604 and proved to be particularly severe. For this reason, the opening of Parliament was changed to 1605. By Christmas Eve, the miners had still not reached the buildings of Parliament, and just as they restarted work early in 1605, they learned that the opening of Parliament had been further postponed to 3 October. The plotters then took the opportunity to row the gunpowder up the Thames from Catesby's house in Lambeth, to hide it in their new rented house: they had learned (by chance) that a coal merchant named Ellen Bright had vacated a ground-floor undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords chamber. Presented with this golden opportunity, Percy immediately took pains to secure the lease. He created the story that his wife would join him in London and that he would need the extra storage space.\nFawkes assisted in filling the room with gunpowder, which was hidden beneath a wood store under the House of Lords building, in a cellar leased from John Whynniard. By March 1605, they had filled the undercroft underneath the House of Lords with 36 barrels of gunpowder, hidden under a store of winter fuel. Had all 36 barrels been successfully ignited, the explosion could easily have reduced many of the buildings in the Old Palace of Westminster complex to rubble, and would have blown out windows in the surrounding area of about a one kilometre radius.\nThe conspirators left London in May, and went to their homes or to different areas of the country, because being seen together would arouse suspicion. They arranged to meet again in September; however, the opening of Parliament was again postponed.\nThe weakest parts of the plot were the arrangements for the subsequent rebellion which would have swept the country and installed a Catholic monarch. Due to the requirements for money and arms, Sir Francis Tresham was eventually admitted to the plot, and it was probably he who betrayed the plot in writing to his brother-in-law Lord Monteagle. An anonymous letter revealed some of the details of the plot; it read: \"I advise you to devise some excuse not to attend this parliament, for they shall receive a terrible blow, and yet shall not see who hurts them\".\nAccording to the confession made by Fawkes on Tuesday 5 November 1605, he had left Dover around Easter 1605, bound for Calais. He then travelled to Saint-Omer and on to Brussels, where he met with Hugh Owen and Sir William Stanley before making a pilgrimage to Brabant. He returned to England at the end of August or early September, again by way of Calais.\nGuy Fawkes was left in charge of executing the plot, while the other conspirators fled to Dunchurch in Warwickshire to await news. Once Parliament had been destroyed, the other conspirators planned to start a revolt in the Midlands.\nDiscovery.\nDuring the preparation, several of the conspirators had been concerned about the safety of fellow Catholics who would be present in Parliament on the day of the planned explosion. On the evening of Friday, 26\u00a0October Lord Monteagle received an anonymous letter while at his house in Hoxton.\nMonteagle had the note read out loud, possibly to warn the plotters that the secret was out, and promptly handed it over to Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, the Secretary of State. The conspirators learned of the letter the following day, but decided to go ahead with their plan, especially after Fawkes inspected the undercroft and found that nothing had been touched.\nHaving been shown the letter, the King ordered Sir Thomas Knyvet to conduct a search of the cellars underneath Parliament, which he did in the early hours of 5\u00a0November. Shortly after midnight, Fawkes was found leaving the cellar the conspirators had rented and was arrested, giving his name as John Johnson. Inside, the barrels of gunpowder were discovered hidden under piles of firewood and coal. Far from denying his intentions during the arrest, Fawkes stated that it had been his purpose to destroy the King and the Parliament. Nevertheless, Fawkes maintained his false identity and continued to insist that he was acting alone. Later in the morning, before noon, he was again interrogated. He was questioned on the nature of his accomplices, the involvement of Thomas Percy, what letters he had received from overseas and whether or not he had spoken with Hugh Owen.\nA letter written by Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Sir Edward Hoby gave details of all those that would have been caught in the explosion:\nOn 5 November we began a Parliament, to which the King should have cometh in person, but refrained through a practice but that morning discovered. The plot was to have blown up the King at such time as he should have been sat in his royal throne, Nobility and Commons and with all Bishops, Judges and Doctors at one instant, and the blast to have ruined the whole estate and kingdom of England.\nFawkes was taken to the Tower of London and interrogated there under torture. Torture was forbidden, except by the express instruction of the monarch or a body such as the Privy Council or the Star Chamber. In a letter of 6\u00a0November, King James I stated:\nThe discovery of the Gunpowder Plot aroused a wave of national relief at the delivery of the king and his sons, and inspired in the ensuing parliament a mood of loyalty and goodwill, which Salisbury astutely exploited to extract higher subsidies for the king than any (bar one) granted in Elizabeth's reign. In his speech to both Houses on 9 November, James expounded on two emerging preoccupations of his monarchy: the Divine Right of Kings and the Catholic question. He insisted that the plot had been the work of only a few Catholics, not of the English Catholics as a whole, and he reminded the assembly to rejoice at his survival, since kings were divinely appointed and he owed his escape to a miracle.\nTrial and executions.\nOn hearing of the failure of the plot, the conspirators fled towards Huddington Court near Worcester, a family home of Thomas and Robert Wintour. Heavy rain, however, slowed their travels. Many of them were caught by Richard Walsh, the Sheriff of Worcestershire, when they arrived in Stourbridge.\nThe remaining men attempted a revolt in the Midlands. This failed, coming to a dramatic end at Holbeche House in Staffordshire, where there was a shoot-out resulting in the deaths of Catesby and Percy and capture of several other principal conspirators. Jesuits and others were then rounded up in other locations in Britain, with some being killed by torture during interrogation. Robert Wintour managed to remain on the run for two months before he was captured at Hagley Park.\nThe conspirators were tried on 27\u00a0January 1606 in Westminster Hall. All of the plotters pleaded \"Not Guilty\" except for Sir Everard Digby, who attempted to defend himself on the grounds that the King had reneged on his promises of greater tolerance of Catholicism. Sir Edward Coke, the attorney general, prosecuted, and the Earl of Northampton made a speech refuting the charges laid by Sir Everard Digby. The trial lasted one day (English criminal trials generally did not exceed a single day's duration) and the verdict was never in doubt.\nThe trial ranked highly as a public spectacle, and there are records of up to 10 shillings being paid for entry. Four of the plotters were executed in St. Paul's Churchyard on 30\u00a0January. On 31\u00a0January, Fawkes, Winter and a number of others implicated in the conspiracy were taken to Old Palace Yard in Westminster, in front of the scene of the intended crime, where they were to be hanged, drawn and quartered.\nFawkes, although weakened by torture, cheated the executioners: when he was to be hanged until almost dead, he jumped from the gallows, breaking his neck and killing himself, thus avoiding the gruesome latter part of his execution.\nHenry Garnet was executed on 3\u00a0May 1606 at St Paul's. His crime was of being the confessor of several members of the Gunpowder Plot, and as noted, he had opposed the plot. Many spectators thought that his punishment was too severe. Antonia Fraser writes:\nDue to the Gunpowder Plot, many Catholics found themselves persecuted or imprisoned in the Tower of London, including the following:\nHistorical impact.\nGreater freedom for Catholics to worship as they chose seemed unlikely in 1604, but after the plot in 1605, changing the law to afford Catholics leniency became unthinkable; Catholic Emancipation took another 200 years. Nevertheless, many important and loyal Catholics retained high office in the kingdom during King James' reign.\nInterest in the demonic was heightened by the Gunpowder Plot. The king himself had become engaged in the great debate about other-worldly powers in writing his \"Daemonology\" in 1597, before he became King of England as well as Scotland. The apparent devilish nature of the gunpowder plot also partly inspired William Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\". Demonic inversions (such as the line \"fair is foul and foul is fair\") are frequently seen in the play. Another possible reference made in Macbeth was to equivocation, as Henry Garnett\u2019s \"A Treatise of Equivocation\" was found on one of the plotters, and a resultant fear was that Jesuits could evade the truth through equivocation:\nFaith, here's an equivocator, that could\nSwear in both the scales against either scale;\nWho committed treason enough for God's sake,\nYet could not equivocate to heaven\n- Macbeth, Act 2 Scene 3\nThe Gunpowder Plot was commemorated for years after the plot by special sermons and other public acts, such as the ringing of church bells. It added to an increasingly full calendar of Protestant celebrations which contributed to the national and religious life of seventeenth-century England. Through various permutations, this has evolved into the Bonfire Night of today.\nProfessor Ronald Hutton has considered the possible events which could have followed the successful implementation of the Gunpowder Plot, with the resultant destruction of Parliament and death of the king. He concluded that the violence of the act would have instead resulted in a more severe backlash against suspected Catholics. Without the involvement of some form of foreign aid, success would have been unlikely, as most Englishmen were loyal to the institution of the monarchy, despite differing religious convictions. England could very well have become a more \"Puritan absolute monarchy\", as \"existed in Sweden, Denmark, Saxony, and Prussia in the seventeenth century\", rather than follow the path of parliamentary and civil reform that it did.\nCommemoration.\nWhen Parliament met in January 1606 for the first time after the plot they passed an Act of Parliament called the \"Thanksgiving Act\". This made services and sermons commemorating the Plot an annual feature on 5 November. The act remained in force until 1859. On 5\u00a0November 1605, it is said that the people of London celebrated the defeat of the plot with fires and street festivities. The tradition of marking the day with the ringing of church bells and bonfires started soon after the Plot and fireworks were also included in some of the earliest celebrations. In Britain the fifth of November is also called Bonfire Night, Fireworks Night or Guy Fawkes Night.\nIt remains the custom in Britain, on or around 5 November, to let off fireworks. Traditionally, in the weeks running up to the 5th, children made \"guys\"\u2014effigies supposedly of Fawkes\u2014usually made from old clothes stuffed with newspaper, and with a grotesque mask, to be burnt on 5 November bonfire. These effigies would be shown in the street, to collect money for fireworks, although this practice is becoming less common. The word \"guy\" came thus in the 19th century to mean an oddly dressed person, and in the 20th and 21st centuries to mean any male person.\nInstitutions and towns may hold firework displays and bonfire parties, and the same is done on a smaller scale in back gardens throughout the country. In some areas, particularly in Sussex, there are extensive processions, large bonfires and firework displays organised by local bonfire societies; the most extensive of which takes place in Lewes.\nThe Houses of Parliament are still searched by the Yeomen of the Guard before the State Opening of Parliament, however, this is done as a traditional custom rather than a serious anti-terrorist precaution.\nA commemorative British two pound coin was issued in 2005 to celebrate the 400th anniversary of the plot.\nThe cellar in which Fawkes watched over his gunpowder was demolished in 1822. The area was further damaged in the 1834 fire and destroyed in the subsequent rebuilding of the Palace of Westminster. The lantern which Guy Fawkes carried in 1605 is in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. A key supposedly taken from him is in Speaker's House, Palace of Westminster. These two items were shown in a major exhibition held in Westminster Hall from July to November 2005.\nAccording to Esther Forbes (a biographer), the Guy Fawkes Day celebration in the pre-revolutionary American Colonies was a very popular holiday. In Boston, the celebration took on anti-authoritarian overtones, and often became so dangerous that many would not venture out of their homes.\nIn November 1930, taking advantage of the bonfires used on the holiday, Alfred Arthur Rouse murdered an unknown man and planted his body as a substitute for Rouse's in his Morris Minor (1928) automobile (which was then set alight). The scheme did not work out, and Rouse was arrested, tried and executed for the crime.\nAccusations of state conspiracy.\nMany at the time felt that Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury had been involved in the plot to gain favour with the king and enact more stridently anti-Catholic legislation. Such theories alleged that Cecil had either actually invented the plot or allowed it to continue when his agents had already infiltrated it, for the purposes of propaganda. These rumours were the start of a long-lasting conspiracy theory about the plot. Yet while there was no \"golden time\" of \"toleration\" of Catholics which Father Garnet had hoped for at the start of James' reign, the legislative backlash had nothing to do with the plot: it had already happened by 1605, as recusancy fines were re-imposed and some priests expelled. There was no purge of Catholics from power and influence in the kingdom after the Gunpowder Plot, despite Puritan complaints. The reign of James I was, in fact, a time of relative leniency for Catholics, few being subject to prosecution.\nThis did not dissuade some from continuing to claim Cecil's involvement in the plot. In 1897 Father John Gerard of Stonyhurst College, namesake of a Jesuit priest who had performed Mass to some of the plotters, wrote an account called \"What was the Gunpowder Plot?\", alleging Cecil's culpability. This prompted a refutation later that year by Samuel Gardiner, who argued that Gerard had gone too far in trying to \"wipe away the reproach\" which the plot had exacted on generations of English Catholics. Gardiner portrayed Cecil as guilty of nothing more than opportunism. Subsequent attempts to prove Cecil's responsibility, such as Francis Edwards's 1969 work \"Guy Fawkes: the real story of the gunpowder plot?\", have similarly foundered on the lack of positive proof of any government involvement in setting up the plot. There has been little support by historians for the conspiracy theory since this time, other than to acknowledge that Cecil may have known about the plot some days before it was uncovered.\nModern plot analysis.\nAccording to the historian Lady Antonia Fraser, the gunpowder was taken to the Tower of London magazine. It would have been reissued or sold for recycling if in good condition. Ordnance records for the Tower state that 18 hundredweight (equivalent to about 816\u00a0kg) of it was \"decayed\", which could imply that it was rendered harmless due to having separated into its component chemical parts, as happens with gunpowder when left to sit for too long\u2014if Fawkes had ignited the gunpowder during the opening, it would only have resulted in a weak splutter. Alternatively, \"decayed\" may refer to the powder being damp and sticking together, making it unfit for use in firearms\u00a0\u2014 in which case the explosive capabilities of the barrels would not have been significantly affected.\n\"\", an ITV programme presented by Richard Hammond and broadcast on 1 November 2005, re-enacted the plot by blowing up an exact replica of the 17th-century House of Lords filled with test dummies, using the exact amount of gunpowder in the underground of the building. The dramatic experiment, conducted on the Advantica Spadeadam test site, proved unambiguously that the explosion would have killed all those attending the State Opening of Parliament in the Lords chamber.\nThe power of the explosion, which surprised even gunpowder experts, was such that seven-foot deep solid concrete walls (made deliberately to replicate how archives suggest the walls in the old House of Lords were constructed) were reduced to rubble. Measuring devices placed in the chamber to calculate the force of the blast were themselves destroyed by the blast, while the skull of the dummy representing King James, which had been placed on a throne inside the chamber surrounded by courtiers, peers and bishops, was found a large distance away from the site. According to the findings of the programme, no-one within 100 metres of the blast could have survived, while all the stained glass windows in Westminster Abbey would have been shattered, as would all windows within a large distance of the Palace. The power of the explosion would have been seen from miles away, and heard from further still. Even if only half the gunpowder had gone off, everyone in the House of Lords and its environs would have been killed instantly.\nThe programme also disproved claims that some deterioration in the quality of the gunpowder would have prevented the explosion. A portion of deliberately deteriorated gunpowder, at such a low quality as to make it unusable in firearms, when placed in a heap and ignited, still managed to create a large explosion. The impact of even deteriorated gunpowder would have been magnified by the impact of its compression in wooden barrels, with the compression overcoming any deterioration in the quality of the contents. The compression would have created a cannon effect, with the powder first blowing up from the top of the barrel before, a millisecond later, blowing out. In addition, mathematical calculations showed that Fawkes, who was skilled in the use of gunpowder, had used double the amount of gunpowder needed.\nA sample of the gunpowder may have survived: in March 2002, workers investigating archives of John Evelyn at the British Library found a box containing various samples of gunpowder and several notes suggesting a relation to the Gunpowder Plot:"}
{"id": "20366", "revid": "1070978", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20366", "title": "John Knox", "text": "John Knox (c. 1510 \u2013 24 November 1572) was the man who brought the Protestant Reformation to Scotland. He was one of the founders of the Presbyterian Church. Knox joined the movement to change the Roman Catholic church in Scotland. He married twice and had five children, and continued preaching until he died.\nA long-time fight between Catholic France and Protestant England for Scotland began again because of the Reformation. As the argument grew more heated, sometimes France had power, sometimes England. Knox spent many months as a galley slave; he also spent time in exile because of his Protestant beliefs. During a return visit to his native land, Knox's preaching helped the Protestant movement. Several Protestant noblemen came together and made a group called the Lords of the Congregation. When the group had more power, they invited Knox back to Scotland to stay.\nDuring 1500 and 1561, the Scottish Parliament accepted the Reformed confession of faith made by Knox and other people. Knox argued many times with Mary, Queen of Scots. In his book \"History of the Reformation in Scotland\" he writes about his five \"conversations\" with the Roman Catholic queen. In one of these conversations, Mary asked Knox what right he had to rebuke the queen so directly and openly. Knox replied, \"...I am a worm of this earth, and yet a subject...but I am a watchman, both over the realm (land) and the Kirk [Church] of God...For that reason I am bound in conscience (it is my duty) to blow the trumpet publicly (openly)\". Mary's violent life finally made even her Catholic helpers lose their support. She gave up the throne. So, Knox was able to make the Protestant church in Scotland. Because of him, the Presbyterian church was made."}
{"id": "20367", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20367", "title": "List of Nobel Prize winners in Physiology or Medicine", "text": "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine is one of the Nobel Prizes which were created by Alfred Nobel. This award is decided by the Karolinska Institutet, a major medical center in Sweden. The Prize is given every year to a person or persons who have done excellent work in the area of medicine (treating or stopping disease) or physiology (the way the body works)."}
{"id": "20368", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20368", "title": "List of Nobel Prize winners in Literature", "text": "The Nobel Prize in Literature is one of many Nobel Prizes given in honor of Alfred Nobel. Every year, a writer is chosen by the Swedish Academy to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature. They choose someone who they think has written something that has great value.\nWriting of any language could possibly win the Nobel Prize.\nList of laureates.\nList of Nobel Prize laureates (winners) in Literature from 1901 to the present date."}
{"id": "20369", "revid": "484549", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20369", "title": "Floods", "text": "Floods are terrible."}
{"id": "20370", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20370", "title": "1 May", "text": ""}
{"id": "20371", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20371", "title": "29 March", "text": ""}
{"id": "20372", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20372", "title": "13 December", "text": ""}
{"id": "20373", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20373", "title": "20 September", "text": ""}
{"id": "20374", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20374", "title": "Zuni", "text": "The Zuni, also called Zu\u00f1i or Ashiwi are a Native American tribe. They live near the Zuni River. This river flows into the Little Colorado River, in western New Mexico, United States.\nThey are famous for their language, which is not like other Pueblo or Native American languages. It is a language isolate."}
{"id": "20375", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20375", "title": "Tidal wave", "text": ""}
{"id": "20376", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20376", "title": "Great Schism", "text": ""}
{"id": "20377", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20377", "title": "Fallacy", "text": "A fallacy is an incorrect argument in logic and rhetoric. It gives a result which is not valid or lacks soundness. In mathematics, a fallacy can occur when the reasoning violates the condition of its applicability. Fallacies are either formal fallacies or informal fallacies.\nFormal fallacies.\nA formal fallacy is an error in logic. This shows in the argument's form. All formal fallacies are types of non sequiturs (the conclusion does not follow from the premises). \nEven if the conclusion of an argument is correct, it is not supported by the logic given.\nInformal fallacies.\nInformal fallacies are arguments that are fallacious for reasons other than structural flaws. They usually need examination of the argument's content. Some examples of informal fallacies include:\nFaulty generalizations.\nFaulty generalizations are made when one reaches a conclusion from weak premises. Unlike fallacies of relevance, in fallacies of defective induction, the premises are related to the conclusions\u2014yet only weakly buttress the conclusions. A faulty generalization is thus produced.\nRed herring fallacies.\nA red herring fallacy is an error in logic where a proposition is, or is intended to be, misleading in order to make irrelevant or false inferences. In the general case any logical inference based on fake arguments, intended to replace the lack of real arguments or to replace implicitly the subject of the discussion.\nRed herring \u2013 argument given in response to another argument, which is irrelevant and draws attention away from the subject of argument. "}
{"id": "20379", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20379", "title": "Goat", "text": "Goat may mean:"}
{"id": "20380", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20380", "title": "Myanmar", "text": "Myanmar is a country in Southeast Asia. Its full name is the Republic of the Union of Myanmar. It is also sometimes called Burma. Myanmar is a country in Southeast Asia that is not an island. It is also part of South Asia.\nIt is bordered by China on the north, Laos on the east, Thailand on the southeast, Bangladesh on the west, and the India on the northwest, with the Andaman Sea to the south, and the Bay of Bengal to the southwest. There are over of coastline.\nGovernment.\nThe country was ruled by a military junta led by General Ne Win from 1962 to 1988. Its political system today stays under the tight control of its military government. In 1991, Senior General Than Shwe began ruling the country. In 2011 Thein Sein was elected as a first president of the civilian government. In 2016 Htin Kyaw became the second elected civilian leader. Aung San Suu Kyi, who is prevented from becoming President by the constitution of Myanmar, will act as an advisor to Kyaw.\nIn March 2018, Win Myint became the country's tenth and current President.\nOrigin and history of the name.\nIn 1989, the military junta officially changed the English version of its name from \"Burma\" to \"Myanmar\". It also made a new name in English for places in the country, such as its former capital city, from \"Rangoon\" to Yangon. The official name of the country in the Burmese language, \"Myanmar\" did not change, however. The renaming was controversial, seen by some as linguistically bad. Accepting the name change in the English-speaking world has been slow, with many people still using the name \"Burma\" to refer to the country. Major news organizations like the BBC still call it Burma. Some question the military junta's authority to \"officially\" change the name in English in the first place. Aung San Suu Kyi, however, calls the country Myanmar now.\nHistory.\nMyanmar had a strong kingdom in ancient times, but the nation was taken over by the British in the 1800s. It was occupied by the Empire of Japan in the 1940s. Myanmar became independent in 1948 as the Union of Burma, and had a democratic government at first. However, in 1962, a coup d'\u00e9tat brought the military into power, where it has been ever since. The founder of modern Myanmar, Aung San was assassinated months before independence. His daughter Aung San Suu Kyi was placed under house arrest many times for leading the democracy movement.\nIn 1991, the military junta agreed to democratic elections, which were won by the National League for Democracy, and should have made Aung San Suu Kyi the Prime Minister. However, the dictatorship ignored the results of the elections and continued ruling. In November 2005, the military government stated that the national capital would be moved from Yangon to a location near Pyinmana, which was renamed Naypyidaw in March 2006.\nSince independence in 1948 and the assassination of Aung San, Burma has had civil wars between its governments and minority ethnic groups like the Kachin, Karen, Shan and others. These conflicts are known as the Internal conflict in Burma.\nLand.\nToday, there are 14 sections. 7 are called states and the other 7 are called divisions.\nThe divisions are split into townships. The townships are divided into villages and wards."}
{"id": "20382", "revid": "294833", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20382", "title": "1460s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20383", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20383", "title": "1460", "text": ""}
{"id": "20384", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20384", "title": "1517", "text": ""}
{"id": "20385", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20385", "title": "1554", "text": ""}
{"id": "20386", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20386", "title": "1532", "text": ""}
{"id": "20387", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20387", "title": "1206", "text": "1206 (MCCVI) was ."}
{"id": "20388", "revid": "16647", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20388", "title": "\u00a3", "text": ""}
{"id": "20390", "revid": "92894", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20390", "title": "Modern Greek language", "text": ""}
{"id": "20391", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20391", "title": "Ben Nevis", "text": "Ben Nevis is the highest mountain in the British Isles at high. It is in Scotland, near Fort William. The mountain forms part of the Three Peaks Challenge and attracts an estimated 100,000 climbers per year,\nThe name comes from the Scottish Gaelic, Beinn Nibheis, which may mean poisonous or terrible.\nThe Summit.\nThe summit of Ben Nevis is a large stony plateau of about . The highest point is marked with a large stone mound which sits an Ordnance Survey trig point.\nThe ruined walls of an observatory are also on the summit. An emergency shelter has been built on top of the observatory tower for people caught out by bad weather. The roof of the shelter is higher than the trig point by several feet, making it the highest man-made structure in the UK. A war memorial to the dead of World War II is next to the observatory.\nOn 17 May 2006, a piano that had been buried under one of the cairns on the peak was uncovered by the John Muir Trust, which owns much of the mountain. The piano is believed to have been carried up for charity by removal men from Dundee over 20\u00a0years earlier.\nThe view from the UK's highest point can reach to over , and mountains such as the Torridon Hills, Morven in Caithness, Lochnagar, Ben Lomond, Barra Head and Knocklayd in County Antrim, Northern Ireland can be seen."}
{"id": "20392", "revid": "7121304", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20392", "title": "Snowdon", "text": "Snowdon is the highest mountain in Wales. Its top is known as \"Yr Wyddfa\" (Old Welsh meaning \"the grave\"). The English name Snowdon comes from Saxon \"Snow Dun\", meaning \"snow hill\".\nIt is in Snowdonia National Park. As the highest mountain in Wales, Snowdon is one of three mountains climbed as part of the Three Peaks Challenge."}
{"id": "20394", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20394", "title": "Businesses", "text": ""}
{"id": "20395", "revid": "92910", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20395", "title": "Students", "text": ""}
{"id": "20398", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20398", "title": "Manaus", "text": "Manaus is the principal city of the North Region of Brazil. It is the capital of Amazonas. Manaus had a great age when latex was discovered in the Amazon region. Manaus developed economically and culturally. After that great age, latex started to be produced in other countries, particularly Malaysia and Indonesia, where due the similar climate the plants start to grow even faster than in Brasil.\nManaus is considerated as the entrance door to the biggest ecological reservation in the planet: The Amazon rainforest. Its name come from a tribe called Mana\u00f3s that lived in this area and means \"Mother of God\". The colonization started on 1669, with a small fort, and around it grew a settlement. In 1833 it became a village, with the name of Manaus. On October 24th of 1848 it receive the name of city and became the Capital of the state.\nManaus is the site of the \"encontro of the waters\" where two big rivers Rio Negro (black river) and Solimoes River come together and for more than 10\u00a0km \"walk together but not mixed\" because of their differing density, and then become the Amazon.\nThe American Charles Goodyear, inventor of vulcanization, developed a procedure to process the juice of the rubber tree into rubber. The city became rich, and India rubber barons paid for a big biggest luxury from Europe, a copy the Grand Paris Op\u00e9ra - the TEATRO AMAZONAS. Other monuments from this time include the MERCADO MUNICIPAL, a copy of the famous market halls Les Halles in Paris, the arts centre RIO PALACIO NEGRO between fascinating Portuguese facades. \nToday Manaus is a foreign trade zone. Foreign enterprises pay here no import duties what guarantees a certain income for the city and the region. Electronics, wood industry and oil refineries have settled in the outskirts in industrial areas. The harbour is the most important trading centre for the care of the city with regional, national and international products.\nAbout 1.5 million people live in Manaus.\nIt was nominated as one of the places for the Soccer World Cup 2014. the city is growing rapidly and start to prepare for the event that will bring a lot of people.\n Manaus in Facebook\nThe Opera house is the major cultural heritage of the Amazonas. It was inaugurated in 1896 during the rubber boom. In spite of the predominance of neoclassic elements, other styles were used, so the architecture is eclectic, with materials brought from Europe as well as artists like Domenico de Angelis, Giovanni Capranesi and Crispim do Amaral. Preserved as a national heritage since 1965, today, with more than 100 years, it has room for 681 people including balconies and three floors of boxes. After the restauration made by the state government in 1990, the theater rescued its splendor, with performances of famous operas, national and international musicians."}
{"id": "20400", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20400", "title": "Amazonas", "text": "Amazonas is the name of four places in South American nations:"}
{"id": "20403", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20403", "title": "1740s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20404", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20404", "title": "Tocantins (state)", "text": "Tocantins is a state in central Brazil. The state was made in 1988 out of the northern part of Goi\u00e1s, and construction began on the capital, Palmas, in 1989. Palmas is much newer than most cities in the area.\nThe state is the border between the Amazon Rainforest and Brazil's grassy flatlands. The state is very important for raising and selling cows and other farm animals."}
{"id": "20406", "revid": "705105", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20406", "title": "Amazon rainforest", "text": "The Amazon rainforest is the largest forest. It grows in the tropical basin of the Amazon River.\nThe forest lies in a basin drained largely by the Amazon River, with 1100 tributaries. It is a moist broadleaf forest which covers seven million square kilometers (1.7 billion acres). Of this, five and a half million square kilometers (1.4 billion acres) are covered by the rainforest.'\nThis region includes territory belonging to nine nations. Most of the forest is in Brazil, with 60% of the rainforest, followed by Peru with 13%, and Colombia with 10%. Venezuela, Ecuador, Bolivia, Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana have just a small amount of rainforest.\nThe Amazon has over half of the planet's remaining rainforests. It is the largest and most species-rich tract of tropical rainforest in the world. The forest was formed at least 55 million years ago, in the Eocene period.\nBiodiversity.\nWet tropical forests are the most species-rich biome. Tropical forests in the Americas have more species than African and Asian wet forests.\nMore than one-third of all species in the world live in the Amazon rainforest. It is the richest tropical forest in the world in terms of biodiversity.\nThe region is home to ~2.5 million insect species, tens of thousands of species of plants, and some 2000 species of birds and mammals and a similar number of fish. The diversity of plant species is the highest on earth with some experts estimating that one square kilometre may contain over 75,000 types of trees and 150,000 species of higher plants. One square kilometre of Amazon rainforest can have about 90,000 tons of living plants. This is the largest collection of living plants and animal species in the world. One in five of all the birds in the world live here. To date, an estimated 438,000 species of plants of economic and social interest have been registered in the region with many more remaining to be discovered or cataloged.\nAmazonian forests as a store of carbon dioxide.\nMore than one fifth of the Amazon rainforest has already been destroyed. The forest which remains is threatened. People who care for the environment warn about the loss of biodiversity. They also point out that releasing the carbon which is stored in the trees will increase global warming.\nConservation.\nEnvironmentalists are concerned about loss of biodiversity due to the destruction of the forest, and about the release of the carbon in the vegetation, which would accelerate global warming. Amazonian evergreen forests account for about 10% of the world's productivity on land and 10% of the carbon stores in ecosystems\u2014of the order of 1.1\u00a0\u00d7\u00a01011 metric tonnes of carbon. Amazonian forests are estimated to have accumulated 0.62\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.37 tons of carbon per hectare per year between 1975 and 1996.\nSome people have calculated that it may even pay to save the forest. They said that one hectare of Amazonian forest in Peru is worth about US $6280, if it is used to harvest fruits, latex and timber (wood). If all the wood is cut down for timber, it has a value of about US $1000. Obviously, this can only be done once; it is not sustainable. When the forest has been cleared, the hectar of land can be used as a pasture, and is worth about US $148. Not all people agree on the study; some have questioned the assumptions behind it.\nThe Brazilian Air Force has been using surveillance aircraft to monitor the forest. At a conference in 2004, scientists warned that the rainforest will no longer be able to absorb the millions of tons of greenhouse gases annually, as it usually does, because of the increased speed of rainforest destruction.\n9,169 square miles of rain forest were cut down in 2003 alone. In Brazil alone, European colonists have destroyed more than 90 indigenous tribes since the 1900s. With them have gone centuries of knowledge of the medicinal value of rainforest species. As their homelands continue to be destroyed by deforestation, rainforest peoples are also disappearing.\nRubber boom.\nOnce the process of vulcanization was invented, companies began to make many kinds of new rubber products, such as boots and seals for machines. American and European companies began buying large amounts of latex from Brazil. This boom in Brazilian rubber began around 1870, but the need for automobile tires brought the greatest wealth to the new rubber producers.\nOther rain forest had rubber trees, but Amazonia had by far the best. However, the trees could not be farmed on plantations because if they were next to each other, the insects would eat them. Therefore, people had to find the trees in the rain forest, cut slits in them, leave cups to collect the latex, and come back later to get it.\nThousands of people moved to the rain forest to work collecting rubber. Most of these people were hired by rich rubber merchants. The rubber merchants loaned them money to come down the river and buy tools. Each merchant\u2019s collectors had to sell the rubber only to their rubber merchant at low prices and buy supplies only from them at high prices. That meant the collectors were always in debt to their merchant and could not leave to do something else. The rubber merchants quickly became very rich.\nThe center of the rubber trade was Manaus on the Rio Negro. It became first a boom town and then a beautiful, wealthy city. It had electricity before most of the cities in the United States did. The newly rich merchants built huge expensive homes and brought in automobiles to travel on the city\u2019s few roads. They built a magnificent opera house with crystal chandeliers and decorated tiles brought all the way from Europe.\nHowever, the rubber boom only lasted about forty years, ending by 1913. Some men had taken the seeds of the Amazon rubber trees and began growing them in the Asian rain forests. The trees grew well there, and they could be grown on plantations. The insects that could destroy them were in South America. So the price of rubber began to fall, and the rubber boom stopped."}
{"id": "20407", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20407", "title": "Gosport", "text": "Gosport is a town in Hampshire, England. The population of Gosport is around 78,000 "}
{"id": "20408", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20408", "title": "Indonesian language", "text": "Indonesian language ()\u00a0is the national and official language of Indonesia and is used in the entire country. It is the language of official communication, taught in schools and used for broadcast in electronic and digital media. Being the top multilingual (especially trilingual) country in the world, most Indonesians also speak their own ethnic or native languages, with the most widely spoken being Javanese and Sundanese which consequently give huge influence into the Indonesian language itself.\nWith huge speakers throughout the country as well as by the diaspora who live abroad, Indonesian language is listed as one of the most spoken languages worldwide. Indonesian language recognized as one of the official languages by several nations globally, such as Timor Leste, Vietnam, etc. Indonesian language also officially taught and used in schools, universities, and institutions worldwide, especially in Australia, Netherlands, Japan, South Korea, Timor Leste, Vietnam, Taiwan, United States of America, United Kingdom, etc.\nHaving a long-established historical ties with European countries since the colonialism era, some of Indonesian terms has absorbed into some European languages, mainly the Dutch and English. Indonesian language itself also has numerous loanwords which derived from the European languages, mainly from the Dutch, Portuguese, Spanish, and English. Indonesian language also has loanwords derived from Sanskrit, Chinese, and Arabic which diffused in Indonesian due to the trade and religious-based activities that had been done since ancient times within the Indonesian archipelago region."}
{"id": "20410", "revid": "7834198", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20410", "title": "All in the Family", "text": "All in the Family is an American situation comedy that aired on CBS from 1971 to 1979. It is about a working class family who live in Queens, New York City. The main character is Archie Bunker. The show deals with many controversial issues (including abortion and racism). The sitcom was created by Norman Lear and it was developed by Lear and Bud Yorkin. It is based on the British sitcom \"Till Death Us Do Part\" which was made by Johnny Speight. Carroll O'Connor, Jean Stapleton, Sally Struthers, Rob Reiner, and Danielle Brisebois are the main actors on the show.\n\"All in the Family\" is seen in the United States of America as one of the greatest television programs in history. The show did not do good in the first season but the a lot more people watched when CBS put in the summer reruns on television. Many people liked that the show talked about controversial issues. The show got number 1 on the Nielsen ratings from 1971 to 1976. It was the first television show to do this. The episode \"Sammy Visit's\" was number 13 on \"TV Guides 100 Greatest Episodes of All-Time and \"TV Guides 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time had \"All in the Family\" as the fourth greatest show of all time. Bravo put Archie Bunker as the \"greatest character of all time.\" \"All in the Family\" had seven spin-off shows made. That is the most spin-off shows from any show ever. \nThe show ended on April 8, 1979 but the spin-off show called \"Archie Bunker's Place\" started on September 23, 1979 and carried on with Archie Bunker until 1984. 15 years later Norman Lear created \"704 Hauser\" which was about a new family living in Archie Bunker's house after he sold it. The show was ended early after five episodes were put on television. \nPlot.\n\"All in the Family\" is about a family who lives during the early 1970s in the suburbs of Queens, New York City. The sitcom's main character is a World War II veteran and blue-collar worker Archie Bunker. Archie Bunker is old, a bigot, and is not very smart. He gets mad at the changes he sees in the world and wants to go back to when life was more easier. Archie does not like the Democratic Party and is a Republican. He stereotypes every person he meets. His wife, Edith Bunker is a nice woman but she is not very smart. She has a very big family but her family does not like Archie Bunker. Archie and Edith have one child. They have a daughter named Gloria Stivic who is a feminist. Archie calls Gloria \"little girl\". Gloria is married to Michael Stivic who is unemployed and is of Polish descent. Archie calls Michael the \"Meathead\" because Michael has different ideas about politics then Archie. Michael and Gloria have a son together. Archie thinks that Michael is dead from his neck to his head. Archie does not like the Jeffersons who are the African American family that live next door to them. Archie argues with George Jefferson many times but George's wife is a friends with Edith. Her name is Louise Jefferson. George and Louise have a son named Lionel Jefferson who helps out Archie. The Jeffersons move away and into the city. Edith also has a cousin named Maude Findlay who takes care of the Bunkers when they get sick. Archie argues with Maude many times because they do not have the same opinions about politics. The characters who live around Archie and his family are meant to show the changing demographics in the world, which Archie does not like.\nEarly seasons of the show.\nDuring the show the family goes through different situations. Many of the most funny moments of the show are in the first season. Early in the show, Michael wrote an angry letter to President Richard Nixon and Archie wrote a letter to Richard Nixon about why he liked him. Archie and the Jeffersons argue over the color of God's skin because he does not think God is black. But Archie gets drunk and is locked in the basement and he thinks that God came to rescue him but it was just one of the Jeffersons. He is surprised that God is black and bows down to him. In many of the episodes Michael and Archie argue. One time Archie was nearly arrested for owning tear gas and another time he went missing. Archie and the people he works with go on strike and Archie does not have a job. But Edith gets a job instead because the family needs money. This makes Archie mad because he thinks that the husband should be working. There are also some flashback episodes. The first one is about the first time Archie and Michael meet. It is a very famous episode and Michael got the name \"meathead\" in it. In the third season the episode,\"The Bunkers and the Swingers\" won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series. The episode was about Edith an Archie not knowing that they agreed to change husbands and wives for a night with other people who do it as a job.\nLater seasons of the show.\nLater on, Archie is in a broken elevator with a woman who Archie thought was crazy, an African American businessman and a Puerto Rican man and women who is about to give birth. In season eight of the show Gloria and Michael move out of the house and move into their own house to raise their son but the house is very close to Archie and Edith's house. Michael and Gloria start to argue many times and they think they might get divorced. Michael looks to Archie for help but it does not work very much. They do stayed married for the rest of the show. Archie's ideas about transgender people are put to test when he saved a transgender person's life not knowing that they were transgender. Many important and controversial things happen in season eight of the show. During the episode \"Edith's 50th Birthday\" a man who is dressed up as a police officer tried to rape Edith. Edith fights him off but has a very hard time telling Archie about it. Another time Archie and Michael are locked in Kelsey's Bar together and they argue but become very close and Archie finally tells Michael that he loves him. Later in the show Archie and Edith raise a young girl named Stephanie Mills who was abandoned by her father and her mother (Edith's cousin). Archie buys a bar with a friend and they own it. The story of \"All in the Family\" continued in \"Archie Bunker's Place\" and the house is the main place with a new family named the \"Cumberbatches\" in the spin-off show \"704 Hauser\" but the show was cancelled less then a month after it started.\nCreating the show.\nThe first pilot episode.\n\"All in the Family\" is based on the 1960s British sitcom television show \"Till Death Us Do Part\". Norman Lear said he read about the show in a \"Variety\" magazine. He thought the show was like the relationship that he had with his father. Norman Lear bought the rights to use \"Til Death Us Do Part\" and used the ideas of the show in \"All in the Family\". Norman Lear is the creator of \"All in the Family\". He would also add some of the things his father did into the show. CBS wanted to have the show but the show was going to be on ABC. There was two pilot episodes made. One was made on September 3, 1968 and called \"And Justice For All\". The pilot episodes had different actors and actresss for Michael (Tim McIntire) and Gloria Stivic (Kelly Jean Peters) and the house they lived in looked different. Archie and Edith were named \"Archie Justice\" and \"Edith Justice\" instead of Archie Bunker and Edith Bunker. Micheal was named \u201cDickie\u201d for the first pilot. Lionel Jefferson was played by D'Urville Martin instead of Mike Evans. For the start of the episode, Archie and Edith were singing, \"Those were the Days\" but the song was longer and shots of where they lived were shown but not them. Also Edith played the piano faster in this pilot episode then the rest of the show. The camera showed the door mat which said \"Justice\" before the episode started. The pilot was taped with three cameras so the people watching could see the characters feelings about things. This would be used for the entire show. Most other sitcoms used one camera but \"All in the Family\" was the first and more sitcoms used three cameras after. The pilot talked about many important issues instead of just one. The characters talked about race, welfare, antisemitism, and even different types of sausage. The ending credits of the pilot episode is the kitchen room with the party decorations up. Edith and Archie are singing the same song from the beginning as the credits roll. \nThe second pilot episode.\nABC did not like the first pilot because they did not think Archie and Edith were good together but ABC gave Lear the money to make a second pilot. The episode was made on February 10, 1969 in Los Angeles and it was called \"Those were Days\". The second pilot episode was almost the same as the first pilot episode but in this pilot Gloria was played by Candice Azzara and Chip Oliver played Richard. Richard was the name of Michael Stivic's character and was named \"Dickie\" in the first pilot episode. D'Urville Martin played Lionel Jefferson again. Another difference from the pilot episodes and the rest of the show is that Edith can be rude to Archie at times and calls Archie,\"Mr. Religion.\" For the start of this pilot episode, Edith and Archie are singing \"Those were the Days\" the same way it would be for the rest of the show. After Edith and Archie start to sing, shots of the neighborhood that they live in are shown but not Manhattan. The ending credits are Archie and Edith singing the same song but they are not shown. Instead the same shots from the opening song is shown but backwards. This was used for the rest of the show. \nThe pilots both had the same story. Gloria and Richard are making a surprise anniversary party for Edith and Archie. Gloria does not want Richard to argue with Archie. Their friend, Lionel Jefferson was fixing the toilet for them. When Richard and Gloria leave Archie and Edith come home, Edith is surprised to see the party. But when Richard and Gloria come back, Richard and Archie start to argue about controversial ideas. Gloria tells Archie that she is going to leave because they keep arguing but she does not. Lionel comes back to the house and Archie tries to show Richard that he likes African-Americans but insults Jewish people instead. Lionel and Richard play a joke on Archie and try to make him think that he is Jewish. Edith opens a present from Archie but he did not make it. She is very happy but Archie is confused. The episodes end with Archie insulting Richard. \nMaking the rest of the show.\nThis was the last pilot and it would be two years until the first episode of the \"All in the Family\" was made. Both of the pilot episodes were never put on television. ABC did not like the show because they thought it was too controversial and because another show, \"Turn-On\" was ended after one episode. They also thought that the people who watch ABC would not like Archie Bunker. Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin took back the screenplay and thought about making a movie with \"All in the Family\" and not a show because Norman and Bud has made good movies. Norman Lear had a meeting with United Artists about making movies and Bud had a meeting with CBS. CBS thought about getting \"All in the Family\" back. Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin agreed to make 13 episodes for the first season and CBS bought the show back. \nThe show was filmed at CBS Television City in Hollywood from 1971 to 1975 and then was filmed at Metromedia Square also in Hollywood, from 1975 to 1979. Tandem Productions was the company that produced the show. Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin created the company. Norman Lear wanted the show to be made in black and white but CBS would not let him. The furniture in the show did not have many colors in them this was because Norman Lear wanted the people watching the show to make it feel like they were looking at family photos. \"All in the Family\" was the first American sitcom to be recorded in front of a live audience. Each episode is 25 or 26 minutes long. CBS had a warning before each episode to warn the people watching that controversial topics would be talked about on the show, but they did it too make people laugh. CBS did this so people would know before the show started if they were going to be offended by what was on the show. Rob Reiner and Sally Struthers played Michael and Gloria instead and the first episode was put on television on January 12, 1971.\n\"All in the Family\" was not famous in the first season. But the show started to become famous when CBS had reruns of the first season on television. \nSetting and location.\n\"All in the Family\" takes place Astoria which is a neighbourhood in the Queens, New York. Many episodes of the show take place at Archie and Edith's house. The address for the house Archie and his family is 704 Hauser but the address is not real. The house is real and is in Greendale also in New York. The Bunker's live near New York State Route 25A which is where Kelsey's Bar is and where \"Archie Bunker's Place\" is set. Many of the places mentioned in the show are real. Like the high school that Archie Bunker goes too is a real high school in Flushing, New York.\nCultural impact.\nMost sitcoms before \"All in the Family\" did not talk about controversial issues. \"All in the Family\" became very famous because it talked about controversial topics like race and sexuality but in a funny way. Many people liked the show because they thought the show was relatable for them because the show was about average people in the 1970s. Norman Lear used this when he made other shows like \"Sanford and Son\". \"All in the Family\" won many awards for it's success. The chairs that Archie Bunker and Edith sit in and the table that is in between the chairs are on display at the National Museum of American History. On the table is Archie's favorite beer and a bowl to stop his cigar when he is done smoking. The hat that Archie wears on the show is also at this museum.\nDuring the 1972 United States presidential election, shirts, and buttons were sold that said \"Archie Bunker for President.\" In 1998, the United States Postal Service created a stamp that cost 33 cents and was about \"All in the Family\".\nIn the sound recordings of the Watergate scandal the then-U.S President Richard Nixon was heard talking about how \"All in the Family\" \"glorifies homosexuality.\" He talks about Archie Bunker and calls Michael his \"hippie son-in-law\" but not does not say the show's name. Richard Nixon liked the show, having been mentioned many times in the sitcom and even been the plot of the second episode of the show. Nixon did not go on the show.\nThe rapper, Redman says Archie Bunker name in some of his songs when rapping about cigars because Archie is very well known for smoking large cigars.\nCharacters.\nMain characters.\nA main character is a character who is in almost all the episodes or is important to the story.\nSupporting characters.\nSupporting characters are characters who are in many episodes and help the main characters at times.\nRecurring characters.\nA recurring character is a character who is in only a few episodes but does not have a big part.\nTheme song.\nThose Were the Days.\nThe opening theme song for \"All in the Family\" is played at the start of each episode. The song is composed by Charles Strouse and the lyrics were written by Lee Adams. \"Those Were the Days\" is sung by Archie Bunker and Edith. Edith is playing during the piano during the song. In the introduction many clips of Manhattan from the sky are used. The clips start to show the neighborhoods as it gets closer to the Bunker's house. The final clip returns to the Bunker's house and Edith and Archie finish singing. There are many shorter versions of the lyrics here is the longest one which was made for Atlantic Records:\nBoy, the way Glenn Miller played\nsongs that made the hit parade\nGuys like me we had it made\nThose were the days\nDidn't need no welfare state\nev'rybody pulled his weight\ngee our old LaSalle ran great\nThose were the days\nAnd you knew who you were then\ngirls were girls and men were men\nMister we could use a man like Herbert Hoover again\nPeople seemed to be content\nfifty dollars paid the rent\nfreaks were in a circus tent\nThose were the days\nTake a little Sunday spin\ngo to watch the Dodgers win\nHave yourself a dandy day\nthat cost you under a fin\nHair was short and skirts were long\nKate Smith really sold a song\nI don't know just what went wrong\nthose were the days!\nIn 1975 Rob Reiner, Sally Struthers, Jean Stapleton, and Carroll O'Connor sung \"Those were the Days\" but changed the name to \"These are the days.\" The song was for the live audience but was not but on television. The lyrics were different and it was about what was currently going on and realizing the changes. This was the only time that Reiner and Struthers were also singing with Stapleton and O'Connor. \nRemembering You.\n\"Remembering You\" was the closing theme song for \"All in the Family\". The song would play after each episode had ended and the credits were being shown. The song was composed by Roger Kellaway. The lyrics were never added to the show but Carroll O'Connor did sing them when he was an television. During the song the clips from \"Those were the Days\" would play but instead it would be backwards. It used to just be a piano playing but lyrics sung by Archie Bunker actor, Carroll O'Connor were added. In the episode \"Stewie Loves Lois\" of \"Family Guy\" this song was played for the end credits:\nGot a feelin' it's all over now - All over now, we're through.\nAnd tomorrow I'll be lonesome, Remembering You.\nGot a feelin' the sun will be gone - The day will be long and blue.\nAnd tommorrow I'll be cryin', Remembering You.\nThere'a a far away look in your eye when you try to pretend to me,\nThat everything is the same as it used to be.\nI see it's all over now - All over now, we're through.\nAnd tomorrow I'll be startin' Remembering You.\nFamily tree.\nThis is the family tree for the Bunker family. Archie and Edith have one daughter, Gloria who is married to Michael. They have one son named Joey. Archie also has a brother named Fred. The information about Archie's siblings do not work a lot. Early in the show Archie says that he has three siblings. But later on he says he was an only child. But there are episode after this that have Archie's brother Fred in them. \nEpisodes and ratings.\nEpisodes.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nAfter the two pilot episodes from 1968 and 1969, the first episode of the first season of \"All in the Family\" was called \"Meet the Bunkers\" and was on television January, 12 1971. Most of the seasons had 24 episodes but the first season only had 13 episodes. There were nine seasons of \"All in the Family\". In the episode, \"Sammy's Visit\" the longest laugh from the crowd happened when Sammy Davis Jr. kissed Archie during a photo. The episode was number 13 on \"TV Guide\"'s 100 Greatest Episodes of All-Time. A special 90 minute episode was made in season nine for the 200th episode. The episode was called \"The 200th Episode Celebration of All in the Family\". The last episode is called \"Too Good Edith\" and is used to start the story of the spin-off \"Archie Bunker's Place\".\nFive episodes of \"All in the Family\" won awards for the episodes:\nSyndication.\nSyndication is when a television program is being shown on a different television network then the first one it was one. CBS started to do reruns of \"All in the Family\" during the sixth season of the show on September 1, 1975. Viacom stopped this in September 1979 and let other television networks air the show. In the late 1980s networks like TBS had the show on. From January 3, 2011, to December 31, 2017, the show aired on Antenna TV. As of January 1, 2018, the show began to air on GetTV.\nRatings.\n\"All in the Family\" is one of three shows ever to be number 1 in the Neilsen ratings five years in a row. The show was in the top 10 for seven of the nine seasons. 40.2 million people watch the show's last episode.\n\"All in the Family\" first season aired at 9:30 pm because more famous shows were aired at 8:00 pm. When a show is \"aired\" it means it is on television at that time. When the show started to be famous, CBS moved the show to 8:00 pm because more people would watch at that time. CBS moved the show to 9:00 pm but put the show back to 8:00 in the last season.\nHome media.\nSony Pictures Home Entertainment released the first six seasons of \"All in the Family\" on DVD from 2002 to 2007. Then in 2010 Shout! Factory released the seventh season of the show on DVD. In 2011, they released the eight and ninth season on DVD. In 2012 the whole show was released on DVD.\nSpin-offs.\nWhen a new show is created from a show that is already present, that is called a spin-off. \"All in the Family\" has the most spin-offs of any television show ever. There are even spin-offs of the spin-off shows. \"Maude\", \"The Jeffersons\", \"Good Times\", and \"Archie Bunker's Place\" were successful sitcoms and Norman Lear and CBS decided to make more. But \"Gloria\", \"Checking In\", and \"704 Hauser\" were not successful and were cancelled.\n2019 television special.\nOn May 22, 2019 ABC aired a television program special. The special was called \"Live in Front of a Studio Audience\" and new actors did an episode of \"All in the Family\" and \"Good Times\". Comedian and television host of \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\" Jimmy Kimmel and the creator of \"All in the Family\", Norman Lear wrote the episode. Woody Harrelson played Archie Bunker and Marisa Tomei played Edith Bunker. The special was filmed in front of a live audience.\nCast.\nThese are the actors and the characters they play in \"All in the Family\".\nAwards and nominations.\n\"All in the Family\" is the first sitcom to have every actor who played the main characters win Primetime Emmy Awards for the show. The show also got nominated for many awards. A nomination is when something is picked with other people to maybe with something.\nTCA Heritage Award.\nIn 2013, the Television Critics Association gave \"All in the Family\" with its Heritage Award for its cultural and social ways it changed society."}
{"id": "20411", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20411", "title": "Saint (disambiguation)", "text": "Saint can mean different things:\nReligion.\nDifferent religions &amp; groups use the term \"saint\" differently. The word comes form Latin \"Sanctus\", which means holy. In general, saints are believed to be good examples of how people should live, or what people should do. Saints are synonymous, or are associated, with holiness. In the Roman Catholic Church, to become a saint, you have to go through a process called canonization, which is performed by the Pope."}
{"id": "20412", "revid": "1015463", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20412", "title": "Saint Lucia", "text": "Saint Lucia is a tropical island country in the eastern Caribbean Sea. It is a part of the Lesser Antilles, and it is north of the islands of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and south of Martinique. As of 2010 there are about 174,000 people.\nThe official language is English. Saint Lucian Creole French (Kw\u00e9y\u00f2l), which is a French-based Creole is spoken by 95% of the people. About 70% of the people are Roman Catholic. \nTwo Nobel laureates, Arthur Lewis, an economist, and Derek Walcott, a poet and playwright, have come from the island.\nSaint Lucia is a full and participating member of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and La Francophonie.\nQuarters.\nSaint Lucia has 11 quarters, or parishes of the island.\nCities.\nThe cities in Saint Lucia are:\nGeography.\nThe volcanic island of Saint Lucia is more mountainous than many other Caribbean islands. The highest point is Mount Gimie, at above sea level. Two other mountains, the Pitons, form the island's most famous landmark. They are between Soufri\u00e8re and Choiseul on the western side of the island. Saint Lucia is also one of the few islands in the world that has a drive-in volcano. It is also famous for clear seas and sandy beaches.\nThe capital city of Saint Lucia is Castries. Over one third of all the people live in the capital. Major towns include Gros Islet, Soufri\u00e8re and Vieux Fort. \nThe local climate is tropical. They have northeast trade winds. There is a dry season from December 1 to May 31, and a wet season from June 1 to November 30.\nSport.\nThe Windward Islands cricket team includes players from Saint Lucia. They play in the West Indies regional tournament. Darren Sammy is the first Saint Lucian to represent the West Indies. He is the current captain.\nTourism.\nTourism is important to Saint Lucia's economy. There are more tourists during the dry season (January to April). Saint Lucia tends to be popular due to its tropical weather and scenery and its many beaches and resorts.\nOther tourist attractions include a drive-in volcano, Sulphur Springs, the Botanical Gardens, the Majestic twin Peaks \"The Pitons\", a world heritage site, the rain forests, and Pigeon Island National Park.\nMost tourists visit Saint Lucia as part of a cruise. Most of their time tends to be spent in Castries, although Soufriere, Marigot Bay and Gros Islet are popular locations to visit."}
{"id": "20413", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20413", "title": "Yuri Gagarin", "text": "Yuri Alexeyevich Gagarin (; March 9, 1934 \u2013 March 27, 1968) was a Russian cosmonaut (astronaut). He became the first human in space on April 12, 1961, in a rocket launch from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in modern Kazakhstan then part of the Soviet Union.\nEarly life.\nYuri Gagarin was born in the village of Klushino near Gzhatsk (now in Smolensk Oblast, Russia), on 9 March 1934. The town next to Gzhatsk was renamed Gagarin in 1968 in his honour. His parents, Alexey Ivanovich Gagarin and Anna Timofeyevna Gagarina, worked on a collective farm. While manual workers are thought as \"peasants,\" this may be too-simple if applied to his parents\u00a0\u2014 his mother was said to love reading, and his father was a skilled carpenter. Yuri was the third of four children, and his elder sister helped raise him while his parents worked. Like millions of people in the Soviet Union, the Gagarin family suffered during the Nazi invasion in World War II. His two elder siblings were sent out to Nazi Germany for slave work in 1943, and did not return until after the war. While a youth, Yuri became interested in space and planets, and began to dream about his space tour which would one day become a reality. Yuri was thought by his teachers, as smart and hard-working, sometimes mischievous. His mathematics and science teacher had flown in the Soviet Air Forces during the war, which was said to make some impression on young Gagarin.\nAfter starting an apprenticeship in a metalworks as a foundryman, Gagarin was selected for further training at a technical high school in Saratov. While there, he joined the flight club, and learned to fly a light aircraft. In 1955, after finishing his technical schooling, he entered military flight training at the Orenburg Pilot's School. While there he met Valentina Goryacheva. Yuri married her in 1957, after gaining his pilot's wings in a MiG-15. Post-graduation, he was told to go to Luostari airbase in Murmansk Oblast, close to the Norwegian border, where bad weather made flying risky. As a full-grown man, Gagarin was tall, which was an advantage in the small Vostok cockpit. He became a lieutenant of the Soviet Air Force on November 5, 1957 and on November 6, 1959 he got the rank of senior lieutenant.\nSports.\nGagarin kept physically fit throughout his life, and was a good sportsman. As the space explorer Valery Bykovsky wrote:\nAs well as being a good ice hockey player, Gagarin was also a basketball fan, and coached the Saratov Industrial Technical School team, as well as being an umpire/referee.\nCareer in the Soviet space program.\nSelection and training.\nIn 1960, after the search and selection process, Yuri Gagarin was selected with 19 other space explorers for the \"Soviet space program\". Along with the other soon to be space explorers, he was tested by experiments made to test his physical and psychological score; he also underwent training for the upcoming flight. Out of the twenty originally selected, the final choice for the first launch was between Gagarin and Gherman Titov because of their performance in training, as well as their physical fitness.\nSpaceflight.\nOn 12 April 1961, Gagarin became the first man to travel into space, launching to orbit aboard the \"Vostok 3KA-3\" (Vostok 1). His call sign in this flight was Kedr (Cedar; ). During his flight, Gagarin famously whistled the song \"The Motherland Hears, The Motherland Knows\" (). The first two lines of the song are: \"The Motherland hears, the Motherland knows/Where her son flies in the sky\". This song was written by Dmitri Shostakovich in 1951 (opus 86), with words by Yevgeniy Dolmatovsky.\nAround the same time, some Western people claimed that Gagarin, during his space flight, had made the comment, \"\"I don't see any God up here\".\" However, no such words appear in the direct record of Gagarin's talk with the Earth during the spaceflight. In a 2006 interview a close friend of Gagarin, Colonel Valentin Petrov, said that Gagarin never said such words, and that the phrase came from Nikita Khrushchev's speech at the fullness of the Central Committee of the CPSU, where the anti-religious propaganda was talked about. In a certain context Khrushchev said, \"\"Gagarin flew into space, but didn't see any God there\".\"\nFame and later life.\nAfter the flight, Gagarin became a world famous celebrity. He toured in many places like in Italy, the United Kingdom, Germany, Canada, and Japan. He did this to promote the Soviet Union achievements.\nIn 1962, he began serving as a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union. He later came back to Star City. While there, he worked on designs for a reusable spacecraft. Gagarin worked on these designs in Star City for seven years. He became Lieutenant Colonel (or Podpolkovnik) of the Soviet Air Force on 12 June 1962. Then on 6 November 1963 he got the rank of Colonel (Polkovnik) of the Soviet Air Force. Soviet people tried to keep him away from any flights, being worried of losing their hero in an accident. Gagarin was backup pilot for Vladimir Komarov in the Soyuz 1 flight. As Komarov's flight ended in a deadly crash, Gagarin was banned from training for and helping out in further spaceflight/s.\nDeath.\nGagarin then became deputy training director of the Star City cosmonaut training base. At the same time, he began to re-join as a fighter pilot. On 27 March 1968, while on a routine training flight from Chkalovsky Air Base, he and flight instructor Vladimir Seryogin died in a MiG-15UTI crash near the town of Kirzhach. Gagarin and Seryogin were buried in the walls of the Kremlin on Red Square.\nPeople are not sure what caused the crash, but a 1986 investigation thinks that the turbulence from a Su-11 'Fishpot-C' interceptor using its afterburners may have caused Gagarin's plane to go out of control.\nRussian documents opened to the public in March 2003 showed that the KGB had changed their own investigation of the accident. In addition to this, one government and two military investigations. The KGB's report removed many conspiracy thoughts, instead of showing the actions of air base personnel added to the crash. The report says that an air traffic controller made Gagarin have old weather information. But by that time of his flight, conditions had become very bad. Ground crew also left fuel tanks on the aircraft. Gagarin's planned flight needed good weather and no outboard tanks. The investigation ended, saying that Gagarin's aircraft entered a spin, either because of a bird strike or because of a sudden move to avoid another aircraft. Because of the old weather report, the crew thought their altitude to be higher than it actually was, and could not properly react to bring the MiG-15 out of its spin.\nIn his 2004 book \"Two Sides of the Moon\", Alexey Leonov tells that he was flying a helicopter in the same area that day when he heard \"two loud booms in the distance.\" His thought was that the Sukhoi jet was flying below its minimum allowed altitude, and \"without realizing it because of the terrible weather conditions, he passed within 10 or 20\u00a0meters of Yuri and Seregin's plane while breaking the sound barrier.\" The resulting turbulence would have sent the MiG into an uncontrolled spin. Leonov thinks the first boom he heard was that of the jet breaking the sound barrier, and the second was Gagarin's plane crashing."}
{"id": "20414", "revid": "1130609", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20414", "title": "Yangtze River", "text": "The Yangtze River, or Yangzi (Simple Chinese: \u626c\u5b50\u6c5f / Traditional Chinese: \u63da\u5b50\u6c5f), or Chang Jiang (Simple Chinese: \u957f\u6c5f / Traditional Chinese: \u9577\u6c5f), is the longest River in China and Asia, as well as the world's third longest river (after the Amazon and the Nile). It is honored as one of the two main cradles of Chinese civilization. (another is Yellow River)\nThe river is about 3,900 kilometers long and is one of the busiest waterways in the world. It goes from the western part of China (Plateau of Tibet) into the East China Sea, which is part of the Pacific Ocean. It has been thought of as a dividing point between northern and southern China. It helped start the Chinese civilization.\nOn the river is a big dam called the Three Gorges Dam, which is the biggest in the world. It forms a man-made lake that stretches almost upstream.\nThe Yangtze River is home to many species. The Finless porpoise is endangered and the Lipotes vexillifer (Chinese river dolphin) which died in 2002. \nTop tourist attractions for the Yangtze river cruise are Chongqing Dazu Carvings, Three Gorges, lesser Three Gorges, Bai Di City, Fengdu Ghost City and so on.\nThe Yangtze River is also known as the Yanugzi or Chang Jiange.\nPollution.\nThe Yangtze river is becoming extremely polluted. The Yangtze river contains oil, dead animals and rubbish including cans, bags, wrappers, glass and plastic bottles. In 2001 about 23.4 billion tons of sewerage and factory waste was dumped in the river."}
{"id": "20415", "revid": "7428179", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20415", "title": "Sons and Daughters of Saint Lucia", "text": "\"Sons and Daughters of Saint Lucia\" is the national anthem of Saint Lucia. The song has been used since the country became independent in 1979. "}
{"id": "20417", "revid": "3317", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20417", "title": "Soil Erosion", "text": ""}
{"id": "20418", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20418", "title": "1590s", "text": "Events.\n1590"}
{"id": "20419", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20419", "title": "794", "text": ""}
{"id": "20420", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20420", "title": "537", "text": ""}
{"id": "20422", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20422", "title": "Security Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "20423", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20423", "title": "General Assembly", "text": ""}
{"id": "20425", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20425", "title": "Tampico", "text": "Tampico is the main city in the state of Tamaulipas, Mexico.\nIt was the site of an incident called the Tampico Affair during the Mexican Revolution in the early 20th century that led to armed conflict between Mexico and the United States. About 80 years earlier Tampico was part of a less serious conflict between the two countries, called the Tampico Expedition."}
{"id": "20426", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20426", "title": "Teddy Roosevelt", "text": ""}
{"id": "20427", "revid": "7855656", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20427", "title": "Goalkeeper", "text": "A goalkeeper is someone who protects a team's goal. There are goalkeepers in sports like football (soccer) and ice hockey, for example. The goalkeeper's mission is to prevent the opposing team from scoring a goal. Goalkeepers normally wear more protective gear than other players on the team but this is not always true.\nFootball.\nA goalkeeper's kit (or \"uniform\") consists of shin guards and gloves to protect his hands from the impact of the ball when he catches it.\nHistorically, however, until the 1960s goalkeepers would wear no hand protection. \nUntil the early 20th century, the goalkeeper would often wear the same coloured strip as his teammates, with the only different item of clothing being his cap. However, in 1909, the Scottish Football Association took steps to ensure the goalkeeper would wear a different colour from the outfield players. This was to show his different role, as the only player allowed to handle the ball.\nIce hockey.\nThe goalkeeper in ice hockey (a \"Goalie\") uses thicker padding than the other players on the team. This is to prevent damage caused by being hit by the puck. The hockey stick of the goalie is much wider than the stick of other players. The bottom edge is also longer and flatter. The goalie has a very large leather glove on one hand. This glove has a large area to help catch the puck. Goalies normally wear masks that give protection to the entire face and head as well as the neck.\nField hockey.\nIn field hockey, the goalkeeper stands in the goal net, and stops the other team scoring. Goalkeepers need a lot of kit to protect them from the hockey balls that are hit at them. here is a list:\nGoalkeepers are the only position in hockey allowed to kick the ball. If another player kicked the ball it would be a foul."}
{"id": "20429", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20429", "title": "BE IW", "text": ""}
{"id": "20431", "revid": "32488", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20431", "title": "Fourth Crusade", "text": ""}
{"id": "20432", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20432", "title": "Omaha Beach", "text": ""}
{"id": "20433", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20433", "title": "Normandy invasion", "text": ""}
{"id": "20434", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20434", "title": "1580s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20435", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20435", "title": "1583", "text": "1583 (MDLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar."}
{"id": "20436", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20436", "title": "1810", "text": ""}
{"id": "20437", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20437", "title": "1730s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20438", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20438", "title": "1730", "text": ""}
{"id": "20439", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20439", "title": "1754", "text": ""}
{"id": "20440", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20440", "title": "1600s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20441", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20441", "title": "1609", "text": ""}
{"id": "20442", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20442", "title": "1601", "text": ""}
{"id": "20443", "revid": "5191199", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20443", "title": "705", "text": ""}
{"id": "20444", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20444", "title": "314", "text": ""}
{"id": "20445", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20445", "title": "1500", "text": "Year 1500 (MD) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The year 1500 wasn't a leap year in the Proleptic Gregorian calendar. \nThe year was seen as being especially important by many Christians in Europe, who thought it would bring the beginning of the end of the world. Their belief was based on the phrase \"half-time after the time\", when the apocalypse was due to occur, which appears in the Book of Revelation and was seen as referring to 1500. This time was also just after the Old World's discovery of the Americas in 1492, and therefore was influenced greatly by the New World.[1] \nHistorically, the year 1500 is also often identified, somewhat arbitrarily, as marking the end of the Middle Ages and beginning of the Early Modern Era.\nThe end of this year marked the halfway point of the 2nd millennium, as there were 500 years before it and 500 years after it."}
{"id": "20446", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20446", "title": "1780", "text": ""}
{"id": "20447", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20447", "title": "1245", "text": ""}
{"id": "20448", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20448", "title": "Mel Brooks", "text": "Mel Brooks (born June 28, 1926) is a Jewish American actor, comedian, writer, movie director, and producer. When he was born in Brooklyn, his name was Melvin Kaminsky.\nHe has directed, produced and written several movies. Most of these are comedies that make references to other movies. \nLegacy.\nBrooks is one of the few artists who have received an Oscar, Emmy, Tony, and Grammy. He was awarded his first Grammy for Best Spoken Comedy Album in 1999 for his recording of \"The 2000 Year Old Man in the Year 2000\" with Carl Reiner. His two other Grammys came in 2002 for Best Musical Show Album for the soundtrack of \"The Producers\" and for Best Long Form Music Video for the DVD \"Recording the Producers - A Musical Romp with Mel Brooks\". He won his first of four Emmy awards in 1967 for Outstanding Writing Achievement in Variety for a Sid Caesar special. He went on to win three Emmys in 1997, 1998, and 1999 for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for his role of Uncle Phil on \"Mad About You\". He won his three Tony awards in 2001 for his work on the musical, \"The Producers\" for Best Musical, Best Original Musical Score, and Best Book of a Musical. He also won a Hugo Award and a Nebula Award for \"Young Frankenstein\". Three of Brooks's movies are on the American movie Institute's list of funniest American films: \"Blazing Saddles\" (#6), \"The Producers\" (#11), and \"Young Frankenstein\" (#13).\nBrooks worked with some people many times. Performers who worked on three or more of Brooks' movies are: Gene Wilder, Dom DeLuise, Madeline Kahn, Harvey Korman, Cloris Leachman, Ron Carey, Dick Van Patten and Andr\u00e9as Voutsinas. \nOn December 5, 2009 Brooks was one of five recipients of the 2009 Kennedy Center Honors at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.\nOn April 23, 2010 Brooks was awarded the 2,406th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nPersonal life.\nBrooks was married to Florence Baum from 1953 to 1962. Their marriage ended in divorce. Mel and Florence had three children, Stephanie, Nicky, and Eddie.\nBrooks was married to the actress Anne Bancroft from 1964 until her death from uterine cancer on June 6, 2005. They met at a rehearsal for the Perry Como Variety Show in 1961 and married three years later. Their son, Max Brooks, was born in 1972. In 2010, Brooks said Bancroft was the main force behind his involvement in making \"The Producers\" and \"Young Frankenstein\" for the musical theater."}
{"id": "20451", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20451", "title": "Advert", "text": ""}
{"id": "20452", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20452", "title": "Hawai\u02bbi Volcanoes National Park", "text": "Hawaii Volcanoes National Park is a national park in the U.S. state and island of Hawaii. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The park was created in 1916. It includes The Mauna Loa, which is the Earth's biggest volcano, and Kilauea, the Earth's most active volcano.\nThe park shows the results of millions of years of volcanism, and evolution. These processes produce bare land from the sea, and with complex and unique ecosystems, a distinct Ancient Hawaiian culture. K\u012blauea, one of the world's most active volcanoes, and Mauna Loa is the biggest, it offers scientists with insights on the birth of the Hawaiian Islands, and can give visitors views of the dramatic volcanic landscapes.\nIn recognition of its outstanding natural values, Hawaii Volcanoes National Park has been designated as an International Biosphere Reserve in 1980 and a World Heritage Site in 1987.\nRecent events.\nOn March 19, 2008, there was a small explosion in Halemaumau crater, the first explosive event since 1924 and the first eruption in the K\u012blauea caldera since September 1982. \nDebris from the explosion was scattered over an area of . A small amount of ash was also reported at a nearby community. The explosion covered part of Crater Rim Drive and damaged Halemaumau overlook. The explosion did not release any lava, which suggests to scientists that it was driven by hydrothermal or gas sources.\nThis explosion event followed the opening of a major sulfur dioxide gas vent, greatly increasing levels emitted from the Halemaumau crater.\nIn 2008, Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park and Jeju Volcanic Island and Lava Tubes became sister parks."}
{"id": "20456", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20456", "title": "Km\u00b2", "text": ""}
{"id": "20459", "revid": "6613438", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20459", "title": "Pertussis", "text": "Pertussis, also known as whooping cough, is a disease that affects about 300,000 people in the US every year, out of 30\u201350 million cases per year. There is a vaccine that can prevent it, so most cases of it are in places where people cannot afford, cannot get, or refuse to get the vaccine. However, this vaccine does not work forever. The disease lasts about 6 weeks, and symptoms include vomiting, violent coughing, and other flu-like symptoms. It is called whooping cough for the sound an infected person makes when they cough.\nThe disease usually infects younger people, as they are more prone to diseases."}
{"id": "20460", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20460", "title": "Whooping cough", "text": ""}
{"id": "20461", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20461", "title": "Whooping-cough", "text": ""}
{"id": "20462", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20462", "title": "Sickness", "text": ""}
{"id": "20464", "revid": "7763543", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20464", "title": "Deity", "text": "A deity is thought to be a powerful spirit that controls events and the nature of things. Deities are also called gods. A female god is often called a goddess. The adjective of deity is \u2018divine\u2019. This word comes from the Latin \"deus\" (female: \"dea\").\nDifferent religions believe in different deities. Since there are many religions in the world there are many different ideas about how many deities there are, what they are, and what they can do. Followers of many ancient religions and some modern religions believe in many deities, which is called polytheism. \nThe two largest religions on earth, Christianity and Islam, believe in only one God, which is called monotheism. Deism is the belief that a deity exists, but that the deity does not very often change or never changes things in the universe. Pantheism is the belief that the universe is the deity, while atheism is the belief that there are no deities.\nIn most religions, believers think deities are immortal (cannot die), and have powers far beyond human powers.\nExamples.\nSome of the deities of different religions are:"}
{"id": "20465", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20465", "title": "Tb", "text": ""}
{"id": "20468", "revid": "396686", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20468", "title": "Odin", "text": "Odin (Old Norse: \"\u00d3\u00f0inn\") is the god of wisdom, poetry, death, divination, and magic in Norse mythology. Son of Borr and the giantess (j\u00f6tunn) Bestla, Odin is the chief of the \u00c6sir and king of Asgard. He is married to the goddess Frigg, and is father to the gods Thor, Baldr, H\u00f6\u00f0r, V\u00ed\u00f0arr, and V\u00e1li.\nKnown as the All-Father, Odin is often accompanied by two ravens, Huginn and Muninn, along with the wolves Geri and Freki; the god rides into battle atop an eight-legged steed, Sleipnir, and wields the mighty spear Gungnir, which was fashioned for him by the dwarves known as the Sons of Ivaldi and is said to never miss its target. \nA defining feature of Odin is his being one-eyed, a result of him having sacrificed an eye to drink from the Well of Ur\u00f0r, which granted him an incomprehensible amount of knowledge of the universe. Odin himself often receives counsel from the severed head of the being M\u00edmir, which recites secret knowledge to him. Half of the souls of those slain in battle will be guided by the Valkyries, battle maidens, to Valhalla, Odin's enormous and majestic hall: the other half go to F\u00f3lkvangr, Freyja's realm. Odin was known in Old English as W\u014dden, in Old Saxon as W\u014ddan, and in Old High German as Wuotan or W\u014dtan, all of which stem from the reconstructed Proto-Germanic *\"w\u014d\u0111anaz\". \nThe modern English weekday name Wednesday bears the god\u2019s name. (from Old English \"W\u014ddnesd\u00e6g\", \u201cW\u014dden\u2019s day\u201d).\nFamily.\nOdin is the son of Borr and the j\u00f6tunn Bestla. He is married to the goddess Frigg, by whom he is the father of the twin gods Baldr and H\u00f6\u00f0r. With the giantesses Gr\u00ed\u00f0r and Rindr, Odin has two other sons named V\u00ed\u00f0arr and V\u00e1li. His eldest son is Thor, god of thunder, born to him by J\u00f6r\u00f0, the personification of the Earth."}
{"id": "20470", "revid": "7029920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20470", "title": "Qazi Muhammad", "text": "Qazi Muhammad (1893-1947) was the Nationalist and Religious Kurdish leader and the Head of Republic of Mahabad (Republic of Kurdistan), the second modern Kurdish state in the Middle East (after Republic of Ararat). He acted as the president of the Russian backed Republic of Mahabad, in Kurdistan of Iran (Eastern Kurdistan) in 1946. He was also the founder of the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran. A year later, the Kurdish national movement (Komeley Jiyanewey Kurd) that he helped organize was crushed by Iran's central government. The Iranian military court sentenced him to death, and he was hanged in Chuwarchira Square in the center of city of Mahabad at March 30 1947. Mustafa Barzani, the father of nationalist Kurdish movement in Iraqi Kurdistan (Southern Kurdistan), was the defence minister in his cabinet. One of his sons Ali Qazi is today an active member in the kurdish movement."}
{"id": "20471", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20471", "title": "Fresh-water", "text": ""}
{"id": "20472", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20472", "title": "Salt-water", "text": ""}
{"id": "20473", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20473", "title": "Sea water", "text": ""}
{"id": "20474", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20474", "title": "Brine", "text": "Brine is water that has more than 5% salt in it. It is used for preserving food. For this it is much like vinegar or sugar. Brine is also used to transport heat. Adding salt to water lowers the freezing point of the water. The solubility of salt in water depends on temperature. At 15.5 \u00b0 Celsius, a saturated solution of brine can hold 26.4 % salt by weight. At 0\u00b0, it can hold 23.3% salt.\nBrines also have some pharmaceutical properties, which can be used to treat people, especially those with diseases of the skin, allergies and common colds."}
{"id": "20475", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20475", "title": "Sea salt", "text": ""}
{"id": "20476", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20476", "title": "1450s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20477", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20477", "title": "1855", "text": ""}
{"id": "20478", "revid": "793", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20478", "title": "The Philippines", "text": ""}
{"id": "20479", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20479", "title": "Music writer", "text": ""}
{"id": "20480", "revid": "414747", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20480", "title": "Aladdin", "text": "Aladdin is a fictional person from the story \"Aladdin and the Enchanted Lamp\", which is part of the \"Book of One Thousand and One Nights\". \nStory.\nThe young man Aladdin is told by a sorcerer (magician), who is pretending to be his uncle, to get him an oil lamp from a cave. Aladdin gets the lamp, but the sorcerer tries to trick him. So, Aladdin keeps the lamp for himself. Aladdin learns that inside the lamp there is a djinn. The djinn can fulfill every wish of the lamp's owner. With the djinn's help, Aladdin becomes rich and powerful and marries a princess. \nThe sorcerer returns and tricks Aladdin's wife into giving him the magic lamp. Aladdin finds out that in a ring he has, there is another djinn. This djinn helps Aladdin defeat the sorcerer, get back the magic lamp, and save his wife.\nAdaptions (new versions of the story).\nThere have been different versions of the story:"}
{"id": "20482", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20482", "title": "Nirvana", "text": "In Buddhism, Nirvana is the state of perfect peace free from reincarnation reached by not wanting more than you have. It means happiness and peace. It is every Buddhist's goal to achieve Nirvana. The Buddha described it as:\n\u201cthe far shore, the subtle, the very difficult to see, the unaging, the stable, the undisintegrating, the unmanifest, the unproliferated, the peaceful, the deathless, the sublime, the auspicious, the secure, the destruction of craving, the wonderful, the amazing, the unailing, the unailing state, the unafflicted, dispassion, purity, freedom, the unadhesive, the island, the shelter, the asylum, the refuge...\u201d (SN 43:14)"}
{"id": "20483", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20483", "title": "Lahti", "text": "Lahti is a city in P\u00e4ij\u00e4nne Tavastia, Finland. Literally it means \"bay\". It is part of the province of Southern Finland. As of April 2014, there were about 103,450 people living in Lahti. Lahti was the eighth biggest city in Finland as of 31 August 2012.\nThe concert house Sibelius Hall () in Lahti is named after Jean Sibelius. Many stars, including Antti Tuisku, have performed there.\nHistory.\nLahti's transport was big already at 14th century. Lahti was first a village that belonged to Hollola. It was been burned in 1877. Lahti has been a city since 1905. The population then was 2,779.\nIn 2016, Nastola merged with the city of Lahti."}
{"id": "20484", "revid": "7816499", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20484", "title": "British Virgin Islands", "text": "The British Virgin Islands are part of the Virgin Islands, which are chain of islands in the Caribbean, the territory is part of the United Kingdom. The British Virgin Islands are the Eastern half of the island chain, and they are a British Overseas Territory. The British Virgin Islands has sixteen islands which people live on. They have more than twenty islands with no inhabitants (people). Over 22,000 people live there, which is many fewer than the neighbouring United States Virgin Islands.\nThe capital city, Road Town, is on Tortola, one of the islands in the group. Most of the people live on Tortola, but the other main inhabited islands (islands with people) are Anegada, Virgin Gorda and Jost Van Dyke.\nHistory.\nThe islands were originally lived in by Caribbean Indians called Arawaks. By the time the first European explorers discovered the British Virgin Islands all of the Arawaks had left. The first Europeans to try and settle in the British Virgin Islands were the Dutch, but the English came soon after and the English and the Dutch settlers used to fight. The Spanish also claimed the islands, but no Spanish people ever tried to settle there. But the Spanish did attack the British and Dutch settlers.\nIn 1672 the British took control of the islands during a war against the Dutch and they have held on to them ever since.\nDuring the early years after European settlement the British Virgin Islands was a plantation economy which relied heavily upon slave labour. After slavery was abolished in the British Virgin Islands there was a long period of decline and many people left. Those who remained were mostly descended from African slaves, although many of them also left to try and find better lives elsewhere.\nIn the 1950s the British Virgin Islands got its own government, and the economy of the islands began to get better with the introduction of tourism and financial services.\nGovernment.\nThe British Virgin Islands are mostly indepependent, but some parts of the Government is run by the United Kingdom.\nA new constitution was introduced in 2007. It grants more control over everyday life to the Islanders, and lists the protection a person can expect from the government. The head of Government in the British Virgin Islands is called the Premier, and he is in charge of a group of ministers of Government which is called the Cabinet. Laws are passed by a group of elected politicians in the House of Assembly. Most of the international relations are still dealt with by the British Government in London on behalf of the people of the British Virgin Islands.\nEconomy.\nMost people in the British Virgin Islands work in the tourist trade or in financial services. There are also a small number of farmers and fishermen."}
{"id": "20487", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20487", "title": "Lamp", "text": "A lamp is a device that makes light and heat. Lamps usually work with electricity, using a lightbulb. In the United States, a lamp is usually considered a desk lamp or floor lamp. Other sources of light are called 'lights', such as streetlights, flashlights, and headlights, which in some countries are called streetlamps, torches and headlamps.\nBefore electric lamps were invented, gas lamps, oil lamps or candles were used."}
{"id": "20488", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20488", "title": "Breslau", "text": ""}
{"id": "20489", "revid": "248581", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20489", "title": "Pinocchio", "text": "Pinocchio is a fictional character from the 1883 book \"The Adventures of Pinocchio\" by Carlo Collodi.\nPinocchio is a puppet, made by wood carver, Gepetto. When he tells lies, his nose gets longer. Pinocchio learns about being a real life boy and wants to be a real human being instead of a puppet made of wood and strings.\nThe most well-known version of the story is the 1940 animated Disney movie \"Pinocchio\"."}
{"id": "20491", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20491", "title": "Diplomacy", "text": "Diplomacy is the use of tact to gain strategic advantage or to find mutually acceptable solutions to a common challenge. It may include the phrasing of statements in a non-confrontational, or polite manner. Diplomacy often involves countries making an agreement with each other, such as a treaty. Diplomacy is the talk between the representatives of states, such as their heads of state. Sometimes, these talks are about trade or business, and sometimes they are about war and peace. Diplomacy happens a lot when two or more countries fight.\nDiplomats are people that are sent from their home country, to meet with and talk to diplomats and leaders of foreign countries. An important type of diplomat is called an ambassador. An ambassador lives in a foreign country and works in an embassy to be available for meetings with the government of that country."}
{"id": "20492", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20492", "title": "Acellular", "text": "Acellular or non-cellular life is life that exists without a cellular structure. Some scientists say that a virus is a type of life form."}
{"id": "20493", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20493", "title": "Manaos", "text": ""}
{"id": "20495", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20495", "title": "Mexico (state)", "text": "The state of M\u00e9xico is one of the administrative divisions of the country of Mexico. It is one of 32 administrative divisions. It is in the centre of the country. It borders Hidalgo, Quer\u00e9taro, Tlaxcala, Puebla, Michoac\u00e1n, Morelos and Guerrero as well as Mexico City. The capital of the state is Toluca. Its biggest city is Ecatepec de Morelos, which borders Mexico Federal district. Teotihuacan is also in this state. It is about 21.355 km\u00b2 in surface. About 14 million people live there as of 2005."}
{"id": "20501", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20501", "title": "Yawn", "text": "A yawn is a reflex. It involves a large, long taking in of air, the stretching of eardrums as the jaw opens wide, and last a (sometimes loud) breathing out. Pandiculation is the act of yawning and stretching simultaneously. It is easy to see when someone is yawning, but no-one knows what its function is.\nYawning is commonly associated with tiredness, stress, overwork, lack of stimulation and boredom. In humans, yawning is often triggered by others yawning (e.g. seeing a person yawning, talking to someone on the phone who is yawning) and is a typical example of positive feedback. This \"infectious\" yawning has also been observed in chimpanzees and dogs. Cats both yawn and stretch, though not necessarily at the same time.\nContagiousness.\nThe yawn reflex has long been observed to be contagious. In 1508, Erasmus wrote, \"One man's yawning makes another yawn.,\" and the French proverbialized the idea to \"Un bon b\u00e2illeur en fait b\u00e2illier deux.\" (\"One good gaper makes two others gape\"). Often, if one person yawns, this may cause another person to \"empathetically\" yawn. Observing another person's yawning face (especially his/her eyes), even reading, or thinking about yawning, or looking at a yawning picture can cause a person to yawn.\nThe immediate cause for contagious yawning may be the mirror neurons in the frontal cortex of certain vertebrates, which, upon being exposed to a stimulus, activates the same regions in the brain. Mirror neurons have been proposed as a driving force for imitation which lies at the root of much human learning such as language acquisition. Yawning may be an offshoot of the same imitative impulse.\nReasons, functions.\nCharles Darwin argued, in \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\", that if a behaviour was present in many cultures, then it must be inherited (wholly or partly). All traits which appear in a wide range of animals must have some function which is supported (or was supported) by natural selection. In most cases the function is obvious, but with yawning we do not know what that function is. Suggestions have been made, but they do not seem to account for its widespread occurrence in mammals, and possibly in other vertebrates.\nOther vertebrates.\nBecause mammals have similar emotions, and can show their emotions very clearly, it is agreed that when they look as if they are yawning, it is yawning in every sense. The reasons for this are similar to the reasons why we think other humans feel the same as us when the show the same signs."}
{"id": "20507", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20507", "title": "Constantine", "text": "Constantine can mean:"}
{"id": "20510", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20510", "title": "Constantine Maroulis", "text": "Constantine Maroulis (born September 17 1975) is an American singer, actor and writer from New York. He was on the popular television program \"American Idol\". With his past work experiences, he stands out from other \"American Idol\" singers. Before he was on television, he sang in the rock band Pray for the soul of Betty. Right now, he is taking a break from his band to sing on his own. He is the first \"Idol\" alum to sign a contract for the making of a new television sitcom."}
{"id": "20511", "revid": "7847266", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20511", "title": "Sean Lennon", "text": " is an American actor, musician, singer and writer.\nLennon was born on October 9, 1975 at New York Hospital in New York City, He is the son of John Lennon and his second wife Yoko Ono. He is Japanese on his mother's side and English, Welsh and Irish on his father's side. This makes him Eurasian. He has the same birthday as his father.\nLennon is currently dating model/musician Charlotte Muel. Lennon had been engaged to musican Bijou Phillips.\nGroups involved in.\nLennon has worked with Mark Ronson and childhood friend Jordan Galland.\nHe has been a member of the groups Cibo Matto, Ghost of a Saber Toothed Tiger and Dopo Yume."}
{"id": "20512", "revid": "7007300", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20512", "title": "Eurasian people", "text": "A Eurasian person is a person of mixed European and Asian descent or mixed parentage (someone with one Caucasian parent and one Asian parent). In Hawaii, the term \"hapa\" is used. Eurasian people can also mean people who live by the Ural Mountains."}
{"id": "20513", "revid": "365128", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20513", "title": "Wallonia", "text": "Wallonia (, ) or the Walloon Region (French: \"R\u00e9gion wallonne\") is a French-speaking region in the south of Belgium. Its official languages are French (98%) and German (2%). Many people understand the local language Walloon, some still speak it, and few people write it. German is spoken mainly in the area of the German-speaking Community of Belgium.\nThe capital of the region is Namur. Other important cities are: Li\u00e8ge, Charleroi, Mons, Tournai and Verviers.\nFrench speaking Walloons share the French community with French speaking people of Brussels.\nCurrent Minister-President of the Walloon Government is Willy Borsus.\nWallonia is one of three regions in Belgium. The other two regions are Flanders (or Flemish Region) and Brussels-Capital Region. "}
{"id": "20514", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20514", "title": "1610s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20515", "revid": "4990434", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20515", "title": "1498", "text": "Events.\n \nWhy was John Cabot famous?\nJohn Cabot was famous as the famous explorer of the coastline of Canada and its subsequent colonization. Cabot was the second European to find North America (after Christopher Columbus). His son, Sebastian Cabot, accompanied his father on many voyages.\n Short Biography of John Cabot\nDate of Birth: Born in 1450 as Giovanni Caboto\nPlace of Birth : Genoa in Italy\nParents: Father - Guilo Caboto, a spice merchant \nSons: Ludovico, Sebastiano, and Sancto\nBackground Facts, Information &amp; Ancestry : \u00e2\u20ac\u02dcCaboto\u00e2\u20ac\u2122 means \u00e2\u20ac\u0153a coastal seaman\u00e2\u20ac\u009d which was a common name given to Italian sailors and navigators \n 1450 John Cabot was born as Giovanni Caboto in the Italian port of Genoa \n 1461 John Cabot moved to Venice with his family. John Cabot helped with the family spice trading business\nEducation: John Cabot was taught cartography, navigation, astronomy, mathematics and seamanship \n 1474 John Cabot married a girl called Mattea. John and Mattea Cabot had three sons called Ludovico, Sebastiano, and Sancto \n 1476 :Obtained Venetian citizenship and was naturalized on 28 March, 1476 \n 1490's Moved to the sea port of Bristol in England \n 1496 March 5: The English King Henry VII granted John Cabot the right to 'seek islands and countries of the heathen towards the west, east, and north' sailing under the English flag \n 1497 May 2: John Cabot boards his ship, the Matthew, to explore the lands across the Atlantic, hoping to find a north west passage to the Indies and China. \nJune 9: John Cabot reaches the New World - at either Cape Breton Island or Labrador\n26 June: Begins his return voyage\nAugust 6: John Cabot and his crew of the Matthew land in Bristol and achieved great fame and glory. He was given a gift of \u00c2\u00a310 for having \"found the new isle\" and King Henry VII also granted him a pension of \u00c2\u00a320 a year \n 1498 February 3: John Cabot granted another patent to undertake a second expedition - to \"take at his pleasure VI englisshe shippes and theym convey and lede to the londe and iles of late founde by the seid John.\" John Cabot assembles a small fleet of 5 ships and 300 men\nJuly 25: The fleet headed north then sailed along the east coast of America past Newfoundland. One of the ships had to go to an Irish port because of damage. The remaining four ships of the John Cabot fleet continue their journey across the Atlantic\nCabot reaches the east coast of Greenland which he named Labrador's Land\nJune 11: The journey was made difficult by icebergs and the cold. The crews mutinied and refused to proceed farther North so John Cabot had no alternative but to turn South along the coast of Greenland. He crossed the Davis Strait on to Baffin Land on to Newfoundland and followed the coast Nova Scotia and New England\nAt this point the John Cabot ships sailed for England \n 1499 The death of John Cabot\nThere is no accurate record of the date or reason for the death of John Cabot but his pension continued to be paid unti1 1499. It seems reasonable to assume that John Cabot reached England with his returning fleet \n from http://www.datesandevents.org/people-timelines/14-john-cabot-timeline.htm"}
{"id": "20516", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20516", "title": "1772", "text": ""}
{"id": "20518", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20518", "title": "Cryptorchidism", "text": "Cryptorchidism is a condition where one or both testicles does not drop down (\"descend\") into the scrotum."}
{"id": "20519", "revid": "7889069", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20519", "title": "Buddy Holly", "text": "Buddy Holly (born in Lubbock, Texas as Charles Hardin Holley, September 7, 1936 \u2013 February 3, 1959) was an American rock and roll singersongwriter. In April 1959, he had a number one song (after death) on UK Singles Chart music chart. He wrote \"That'll Be the Day\"; In 1957 the song when played by The Crickets, went to number one on Billboard Hot 100 and UK Singles Chart.\nHolly was important in the history of rock and roll music overall, and in the sub genre, rockabilly music.\nHolly played several different types of instruments. His style was influenced by gospel music, country music, and rhythm and blues. The style of his music shifted from country and western to entirely rock and roll. His group were called The Crickets.\nBuddy Holly died on February 3, 1959 when a Beechcraft Bonanza 35 airplane carrying him crashed into a field near Mason City, Iowa. Also killed in the crash were Ritchie Valens and J.P. \"The Big Bopper\" Richardson, including pilot Roger Peterson.\nIn popular culture.\nSinger Don McLean's popular 1971 song \"American Pie\" made February 3 known as \"The Day the Music Died.\""}
{"id": "20521", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20521", "title": "4 August", "text": ""}
{"id": "20522", "revid": "1036384", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20522", "title": "John Denver", "text": "Henry John Deutschendorf Jr. (December 31, 1943 \u2013 October 12, 1997) was an American musician and songwriter. He was of German and Irish ancestry. He was very popular in the 1970s. He died when the plane he was flying crashed in California.\nDenver began his music career with folk music groups during the late 1960s. By 1974, he was one of America's best-selling performers, and AllMusic has described Denver as \"among the most beloved entertainers of his era\" On 12 October 1997, John Denver died in a plane crash aged 53.\nAwards and recognition.\nAcademy of Country Music\nAmerican Music Awards\nCountry Music Association\nEmmy Awards\nGrammy Awards\nSongwriters Hall of Fame\nDeath.\nOn 12 October 1997, a lite plane Denver was piloting, crashed into Monterey Bay, killing him. Denver was 53 years old; his remains were cremated, and his ashes were scattered in the Rocky Mountains."}
{"id": "20524", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20524", "title": "Castaic, California", "text": "Castaic is an unincorporated community and census-designated place in the U.S. state of California. It is in Los Angeles County."}
{"id": "20525", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20525", "title": "North West England", "text": "North West England is one of the regions of England in the United Kingdom. The cities of Liverpool and Manchester are in the south of this region. The northern area (which includes Cumbria and part of Lancashire) is full of villages.\nLocal government.\nThe official region consists of the following subdivisions:"}
{"id": "20526", "revid": "7873115", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20526", "title": "Central Point, Oregon", "text": "Central Point is a city in Oregon, USA. It has a population of 16,550 people as of 2006. It has an area of 3.1 square miles."}
{"id": "20528", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20528", "title": "Puebla, Puebla", "text": "Puebla, Mexico is a Mexican city. It is southeast of Mexico City in a broad valley. The city has had many names over the years including City of Angels, City of Tiles, and Heroic City of Zaragoza.\nPuebla was the main city of colonial Mexico. The architecture and look of Puebla is the most European of all the colonial cities. This is because it was built completely by a Spanish. Most cities at the time were built within an existing Native American community.\nPuebla is highly industrialized, having factories belonging to Volkswagen, Audi, and Bimbo. The historic downtown area remains a Spanish colonial treasure. It is filled with 17th and 18th century European architecture. The city has a nice climate all year around, friendly and courteous people living there and good food."}
{"id": "20530", "revid": "142966", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20530", "title": "Puebla", "text": "Puebla is part of the name of several places:"}
{"id": "20531", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20531", "title": "Subtract", "text": ""}
{"id": "20532", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20532", "title": "Multiply", "text": ""}
{"id": "20533", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20533", "title": "Divide", "text": ""}
{"id": "20535", "revid": "7745869", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20535", "title": "Namur (city)", "text": "Namur (, ) is a city in Belgium. It is both the capital of the province with the same name, as well as of Wallonia, one of the three administrative regions of Belgium. It is in the French-speaking part of Belgium. \nIn 2012, there were 112'246 people in Namur.\nNamur is at 50\u00b0 27 North, 04\u00b0 51 East."}
{"id": "20536", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20536", "title": "Namen (city)", "text": ""}
{"id": "20540", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20540", "title": "Mariska Hargitay", "text": "Mariska Hargitay (born January 23, 1964 in Los Angeles, California, USA) is an American actress. She is best known for her role on the television series \"\". She is also the daughter of actor Jayne Mansfield.\nCareer.\nHargitay plays Detective Olivia Benson on the television series \"Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit. \"Olivia is a sex-crimes detective who works with people and children who have been abused, assaulted, raped, molested, and otherwise victimized.\nHargitay was inspired by the sad stories she learned on SVU, and she created the real-life Joyful Heart Foundation in 2004. The Joyful Heart Foundation helps real-life survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault."}
{"id": "20542", "revid": "145452", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20542", "title": "Santa Cruz de Tenerife", "text": "Santa Cruz de Tenerife is the capital of the Canary Islands. It is in Tenerife, the biggest and most important (political and economic) island in the Canary Islands.\nThe Parliament of the Canary Islands is in Santa Cruz de Tenerife. The population was 222,417 in 2009. During the Carnival of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, thousands of people take to the streets each year for over a week. On January 18, 1980 it was declared a Fiesta of International Tourist Interest by the Secretary of State for Tourism, and is one of the world's largest carnivals."}
{"id": "20545", "revid": "7858215", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20545", "title": "Saint Helena", "text": "Saint Helena is an island of volcanic origin in the South Atlantic Ocean at . It is named after Saint Helena of Constantinople. It is part of the British Overseas Territory of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, which also includes Ascension Island and the islands of Tristan da Cunha. Saint Helena measures about and has a population of 4,084 (2008 census).\nNapoleon was sent to this island by the British and their allies as a result of Napoleon's return from the Elba island and loss at the Battle of Waterloo. Napoleon died there in 1821.\nThe island is on a tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nHistory.\nEarly history (1502\u20131658).\nThe island was discovered in 1502 by the Portuguese admiral Jo\u00e3o da Nova, and he named it \"Santa Helena\" after Helena of Constantinople. The traditional date of this discovery was long thought to be 21 May, but the results of an investigation into the discovery published in 2015 concluded this date is probably wrong, the 3 May seeming to be historically more valid. Another theory holds that the island found by De Nova was actually Tristan da Cunha, to the south, and that Saint Helena was discovered by some of the ships under the command of Est\u00eav\u00e3o da Gama on 30 July 1503.\nThe Portuguese found the island uninhabited, with an abundance of trees and fresh water. They imported livestock, fruit trees and vegetables, and built a chapel and one or two houses. Though they formed no permanent settlement, the island was, for ships travelling from Asia to Europe, an important place to stop to get food and water, and frequently sick sailors were left on the island to recover. After 1588, the island was visited also by Dutch and English ships.\nThe Dutch Republic formally made claim to St Helena in 1633, although there is no evidence that they ever occupied, colonised or fortified it. By 1651, the Dutch had mainly abandoned the island in favour of their colony at the Cape of Good Hope.\nEast India Company (1658\u20131815).\nIn 1657, the English East India Company was given a permit to govern St\u00a0Helena by Oliver Cromwell, and the following year the Company decided to colonise the island with farmers. The first governor, Captain John Dutton, got there in 1659, and made St\u00a0Helena one of Britain's oldest colonies outside North America and the Caribbean. A fort was completed and a number of houses were built. After the Restoration of the English monarchy in 1660, the East India Company received a Royal permit to start a colony in the island. The fort was named \"James Fort\" and the town \"Jamestown\", in honour of the Duke of York, later King James II of England.\nThe importation of slaves was made illegal in 1792 and Chinese workers were brought to work in the farms. Many were allowed to stay, and their descendents became integrated into the population.\nBritish rule (1815\u20131821) and Napoleon's exile.\nIn 1815, the British government decided to use the island of St. Helena as a place of detention for Napoleon Bonaparte. To prevent any attempt to escape from the nearby islands, they formally annexed the islands of Ascension and Tristan da Cunha. In 1821, Napoleon died on the island of St\u00a0Helena.\nIn 1858, the French emperor Napoleon III got the possession, in the name of the French government, of Longwood House and the lands around it, last residence of Napoleon I (who died there in 1821). It is still French property.\nCrown colony (1834\u20131981).\nOn 22 April 1834, the island of St\u00a0Helena became a colony of the British crown.\nA local industry using the fibre from New Zealand flax was successfully reestablished in 1907 and generated considerable income during the First World War. However, the industry declined because of transportation costs and competition from synthetic fibres and the last flax industry closed in 1965.\nIn 1922, the Ascension then was attached as a dependency followed by the Tristan da Cunha Island 12 January 1938.\n1981 to present.\nIn 1981, the British governmente changed the status of Saint\u00a0Helena and the other Crown colonies to \"British Dependent Territories\".\nIn 2009, Saint Helena and its two territories received equal status under a new constitution, and the British Overseas Territory was renamed Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha.\nGeography, plants and animals.\nThe island of Saint Helena has a total area of . The centre is covered by forest, of which some has been planted. Much of the island has been identified by BirdLife International as being important for bird conservation, especially the endemic Saint Helena Plover or Wirebird, and for seabirds breeding on the islets near the coast.\nThe highest point of the island is Diana's Peak () at . In 1996 it became the island's first national park. In 2000 a project began to replant part of the lost Great Wood, called the Millennium Forest, and is now managed by the Saint Helena National Trust, established in 2002.\nThere are several rocks and islets off the coast, including: Castle Rock, Speery Island, the Needle, Lower Black Rock, Upper Black Rock (South), Bird Island (Southwest), Black Rock, Thompson's Valley Island, Peaked Island, Egg Island, Lady's Chair, Lighter Rock (West), Long Ledge (Northwest), Shore Island, George Island, Rough Rock Island, Flat Rock (East), the Buoys, Sandy Bay Island, the Chimney, White Bird Island and Frightus Rock (Southeast), all of which are within one kilometre of the shore.\nThe national bird of Saint Helena is the Saint Helena Plover, known locally as the Wirebird. It appears on the coat of arms of Saint Helena and on the flag.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Saint Helena is tropical, marine and mild, tempered by trade winds that blow almost continuously.\nAdministrative divisions.\nSaint Helena is divided into eight districts. People that works and lives in the Jamestown Harbour and in the Royal Mail Ship \"St. Helena\" (RMS) are included in the census in their work places (see reference).\nEconomy.\nThe island had an economy of only one crop until 1966, based on the cultivation and processing of New Zealand flax for rope and string. St\u00a0Helena's economy is now weak, and is almost entirely sustained by aid from the British government.\nThe tourist industry is heavily based on the presence of Napoleon in the island.\nSaint Helena produces what is said to be the most expensive coffee in the world. It also produces and exports \"Tungi Spirit\", made from the fruit of the prickly or cactus pears, \"Opuntia ficus-indica\" (\"Tungi\" is the local St Helenian name for the plant). Ascension Island, Tristan da Cunha and Saint Helena all issue their own postage stamps which provide a significant income.\nBanking and currency.\nSaint Helena has its own currency, the Saint Helena pound, which is at parity with the pound sterling. The government of Saint Helena produces coins and banknotes. The Bank of Saint Helena was established on Saint Helena and Ascension Island in 2004. It has branches in Jamestown on Saint Helena, and in Georgetown, Ascension Island."}
{"id": "20547", "revid": "687039", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20547", "title": "Helicopter", "text": "A helicopter (also often used: chopper or heli) is a kind of flying machine or aircraft. A helicopter lifts up off \nof the ground and moves because of its rotors. A rotor is several small wings, called rotor blades, that spin together around a shaft. For that reason, helicopters are sometimes called \"rotary-wing aircraft\". A helicopter flies differently from an airplane. An airplane must move forward to stay in the air, but because the helicopter's rotor blades are always moving, the helicopter can stop and stay in one place above the ground. Not needing a runway, they can land in places where an airplane cannot. Helicopters can move by tilting their rotor blades, which causes the aircraft to fly in the direction the blades are tilted.\nHistory.\nSince around 400 BC, the Chinese had a flying top that was used as a children's toy. The flying top was made from bamboo and used the same method of spinning wings to fly up in the air. Later flying tops were made of feathers tied to a stick. Leonardo da Vinci first thought of a helicopter flown by a man in 1490, and drew pictures of his ideas. It was hundreds of years later (in the early 20th century) before anyone built one that could really fly. The first practical helicopters were built by Frenchman Louis Breguet in 1935 and by German Henrich Focke in 1936. A Russian immigrant, Igor Sikorsky, built and perfected the first practical helicopter in America in 1939.\nUses.\nHelicopters are especially useful when there are disasters when infrastructure is damaged. Food packets, water, medicines and clothes are dropped from the air to people on the ground who cannot be reached by road. When people are injured, helicopters can carry them to hospitals faster than an ambulance on the road. \nHelicopters are also used by the military, because they can move troops and equipment to places an airplane cannot take them. Attack helicopters act as attack aircraft carrying and shooting guns and missiles.\nTraining helicopter is used for learning how to be a helicopter pilot."}
{"id": "20548", "revid": "7820348", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20548", "title": "Baku", "text": "Baku (; , from the medieval \"B\u00e2d-kube\", meaning \"wind-pounded city\", a compound word of \"b\u0101d\", \"wind\", and \"kube\", which is rooted in the verb \u06a9\u0648\u0628\u06cc\u062f\u0646 \"kubidan\", \"to pound\", thus meaning a place where the wind would be strong and pounding, and ancient city names \"Baraca\"/) is the capital) is the capital and the largest city of Azerbaijan, as well as the largest city on the Caspian Sea and of the Caucasus region. It is on the southern shore of the Absheron Peninsula. Baku is located below sea level, which makes it the lowest lying national capital in the world and also the largest city in the world located below sea level. Modern Baku has three parts: the Old Town (\u0130\u00e7\u0259ri \u015e\u0259h\u0259r), the boomtown and the Soviet-built town. About 3 million people live in the metropolitan area. There are large numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons.\nIn Baku area there is a lot of oil. There are a lot of state and private universities.\nBaku is hosted the 57th Eurovision Song Contest in May 2012. They also bid to host the 2020 Summer Olympics. The city's three main football clubs are Neftchi Baku, FC Baku and Inter Baku. Baku is one of world's leading chess centres.\nDivisions.\nToday, Baku is divided into 11 \"raions\" (administrative districts) and 5 settlements of city type. "}
{"id": "20549", "revid": "447974", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20549", "title": "Windows ME", "text": "Windows ME is the Millennium Edition of the Microsoft Windows operating system. Windows ME is based on Windows 98. Windows Me was based on MS-DOS (as were Windows 98 and Windows 95), and is meant for people using computers in their homes. Windows 2000 and Windows ME are similar in looks, but Windows ME has features that families find useful, while Windows 2000 was meant for businesses, although many home users also used Windows 2000 especially after Windows ME got bad reviews.\nIt was released in the year 2000, and thus was called Windows Millennium Edition. It was the last Windows to be based on MS-DOS. Unlike Windows 2000, Windows ME generally got negative reviews due to bugs and incompatible hardware. Support and updates for Windows ME (and Windows 98) ended in 2006, whereas Windows 2000 was supported until 2010."}
{"id": "20550", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20550", "title": "Librarian", "text": "A librarian is a person responsible for selecting, organizing, and delivering information materials in a variety of formats such as electronic databases, primary source materials, or printed books. Librarians also teach people to find and evaluate information found on the World Wide Web using Internet search tools and strategies. Librarians may work in different areas. Purchasing materials, putting them into categories, teaching, assisting people with questions, and working with information technology are a few of the possible specializations.\nThe role of a librarian varies across different types of libraries and locations.\nTraining.\nTo become a librarian in a university a person needs to have a master's degree in Library Science (MLS) or a master's degree in Library and Information Science.\nEmployment.\nMost librarians work for libraries in schools, colleges, or universities or in municipal, regional, or national libraries. Some librarians also work for private companies, to help them to organize their documents and reports. There are librarians that also work with the deaf and in prisons.\nRelated jobs.\nOther jobs in libraries include the job of library technician. To become a library technician, a person needs to complete a college diploma."}
{"id": "20553", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20553", "title": "Graveyard", "text": ""}
{"id": "20554", "revid": "348871", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20554", "title": "Geronimo", "text": "Geronimo (\"Chiricahua\" Goyaa\u0142\u00e9 'One Who Yawns'; often spelled Goyathlay in English), (June 16, 1829\u2013February 17, 1909) was a well-known Native American leader, but not chief, of the Chiricahua Apache tribe, but he was a Bedonkohe Apache. He was born in what is now the state of New Mexico and was also a respected medicine man. The name Geronimo was given to him by Mexican soldiers who either called to Saint Jerome while fighting him or transcribed his name into Spanish wrong. He led 38 Apache men, women, and children to resist being sent to reservations by the United States government or being captured by the Mexican Army. He surrendered in 1886. After that, he was moved to many different forts in the United States. In 1904 during the world fair in St. Louis, he sold souvenirs and pictures of himself. He died in 1909 from pneumonia."}
{"id": "20555", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20555", "title": "Namur", "text": "Namur has these meanings:"}
{"id": "20556", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20556", "title": "Namen", "text": ""}
{"id": "20557", "revid": "2337", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20557", "title": "Gold Rush", "text": ""}
{"id": "20558", "revid": "687039", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20558", "title": "Gold rush", "text": "A gold rush is when a lot of miners go to a mining place full of gold. Well-known examples are the California Gold Rush of 1849, the Australian gold rush which began in 1851, or the Fraser river gold rush in British Columbia, Canada in 1858."}
{"id": "20559", "revid": "1140025", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20559", "title": "California Gold Rush", "text": "The California Gold Rush started when James Wilson Marshall was building a water powered sawmill for John Sutter in 1848. When he finished building the sawmill, he went to the river to fetch some water. He saw some shiny little flakes of gold in the river. He immediately went to tell John, and they tried to keep it a secret. But word soon got out, and the gold rush started.\nIt was 1849 when the Gold Rush started. People who came to California for gold were called forty-niners because they came in the year 1849. Some of them became rich but most did not. Some people started selling things. Many of them became rich, famous, and politically powerful. Sometimes a woman could earn more than her mining husband. \nMen like Levi Strauss also sold things. He invented and sold jeans made from strong denim. The California Gold Rush ended in 1855. Many gold miners went back home because gold was harder to find; others found other work."}
{"id": "20560", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20560", "title": "Jeans", "text": "Jeans are a type of pants made from heavy, strong cotton material (fabric) called denim. They were invented in the United States by Levi Strauss in 1872. In the late 1800s, jeans were worn by workers. Jeans are one of the most obvious symbols of American cultural influence in the world. They are worn in many countries around the world.\nIn the 1950s, jeans became a popular fashion for teenagers and young adults. In the 1950s, jeans were part of rockabilly fashion for teenagers. Now, jeans are a very popular type of pants. They are usually worn as casual fashion clothing. Jeans are made in many styles and colors.\nThe word \"jeans\" came from the French name of the city in Italy where a strong cotton fabric was made. The Italian city's name, Genoa, was spelled \"jene\" in Middle English and \"G\u00eanes\" in the French language. "}
{"id": "20561", "revid": "756599", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20561", "title": "Sovereignty", "text": "Sovereignty is the right of a government to have complete control over its area. The idea that this right comes from doing good things for the people under control of the government is as old as Ancient Greece if not older.\nThe exact meaning of Sovereignty has changed some in the past. The present meaning of Sovereignty is said to come from the Peace of Westphalia, an agreement between the rulers of Europe in 1648 which said:\nThe Past.\nAncient Rome.\nAncient Rome was first the Roman Republic, but then when Octavian made the Roman Empire the Emperor of Rome said that he was \"Sovereign\". The meaning of this was that he could make any law he wanted, and he did not have to do what the law said himself.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the time of the Middle Ages many kings and rulers had to do what other leaders said, such as the leader of the Catholic Church, the Pope. Because of this, the idea of \"Sovereignty\" was not much used. \nReformation.\nIn the time of the Protestant Reformation, in the 16th century, governments were breaking away from religious leaders. Also many wars were fought between different rulers inside areas that are now sovereign countries. The English Civil War is one example of a war fought in this time between leaders inside one country.\nThe Peace of Westphalia was made in 1648 and the idea of \"Sovereignty\" came back. Governments were now separate from outside leaders and only one government or ruler inside a country could make laws. The divine right of kings became more widespread.\nThe Enlightenment.\nThe English thinker Thomas Hobbes wrote a book in 1651 that said rulers and governments are \"Sovereign\" because they are good for the safety of the people. The idea that people could change rulers if they were not safe was new with Hobbes.\nJean-Jacques Rousseau wrote a book in 1763 that said the choice of the people is the only thing sovereignty comes from.\nIn 1789 the French Revolution made an important country's government ruled by the choices of the people for the first time after the Middle Ages (some cities and small countries were democracies in the Middle Ages). There were many problems and France went back to the old way soon after, but would be ready for Democracy in 1870's. In England, many people got to vote after The Reform Act in 1832. The United States broke away from England in 1776-1783, but was not an important country at that time.\nPresent.\nBetween Countries.\n\"Sovereignty\" when talking about relations between countries mostly means the rights a Sovereign state has over its territory.\nSometimes there is discussion about when a government loses Sovereignty because it is doing bad things for its people. In this case justice may mean other countries need to intrude on the sovereignty of the government.\nInside a Country.\n\"Sovereignty\" when talking about relations between groups inside one country usually means which group has the Legitimacy to rule. This may not be certain. Sometimes the group who is most able to rule (because of a strong military) is not Legitimate."}
{"id": "20565", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20565", "title": "U.S. Virgin Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "20567", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20567", "title": "Dairy products", "text": ""}
{"id": "20568", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20568", "title": "Borders", "text": ""}
{"id": "20569", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20569", "title": "FIFA", "text": "The (FIFA ; French for \"International Federation of Association Football\") is the organization that controls international football (also called \"association football\"). The organization\u2019s main buildings are in Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland. FIFA organizes major international football tournaments, and the most famous one is the FIFA World Cup, which has been held since 1930. FIFA was established on May 21, 1905 in Paris and has 209 national associations as its members. The organization\u2019s official languages are English, French, German and Spanish.\nThe president of FIFA is currently Gianni Infantino, serving since 26 February 2016.\nThe most powerful organ of FIFA is the FIFA Congress, which is an assembly made up of representatives from each member association. The Congress holds a regular meeting once a year, and since 1998 an additional meeting has been held every year. Only the Congress can pass changes to FIFA's laws.\nThe Congress decides whether FIFA should accept new national associations and elects the President of FIFA, its General Secretary and the other members of FIFA's executive committee. The President and General Secretary take care of what goes on within and around FIFA. The executive committee, with the President as its head, is responsible for deciding the dates, locations and format of tournaments.\nAlso, there are six regional confederations recognized by FIFA which take care of the game in the seven different continents of the world. National associations must be members of both FIFA and their regional confederation in order for their teams to compete in FIFA's competitions. The six confederations are AFC (Asian Football Confederation in Asia and Australia), CAF (Conf\u00e9d\u00e9ration Africaine de Football in Africa), CONCACAF (Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football in North America and Central America), CONMEBOL (Confederaci\u00f3n Sudamericana de F\u00fatbol in South America), OFC (Oceania Football Confederation in Oceania) and UEFA (Union Europ\u00e9enne de Football Association in Europe)."}
{"id": "20570", "revid": "3609", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20570", "title": "Federation Internationale de Football Association", "text": ""}
{"id": "20572", "revid": "3609", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20572", "title": "Federation of International Football Associations", "text": ""}
{"id": "20573", "revid": "3609", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20573", "title": "International Federation of Football Associations", "text": ""}
{"id": "20576", "revid": "7543843", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20576", "title": "American Idol", "text": "American Idol is an American reality-singing competition series created by Simon Fuller, produced by 19 Entertainment, and distributed by FremantleMedia North America. It aired on Fox from June 11, 2002 to April 7, 2016, as an addition to the Idols format based on the British series Pop Idol and has since become one of the most successful shows in the history of American television. On March 11, 2018, the 16th season aired on ABC.\nEventually the American people are allowed to vote by calling or texting, and the person with the fewest votes is off the show.\nThe TV show consists of multiple rounds of elimination. The singers can be anyone between the age of 15 and 29 years.\nHost and judges.\n\"American Idol\" has three judges, who give comments on performances.\nThe three judges are: \nHost"}
{"id": "20577", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20577", "title": "Smile", "text": "A smile is a face made by flexing the muscles near both ends of the mouth. The smile can also be made through the eyes (See 'Duchenne smile' below). Smiles usually express happiness. A smile can be natural or fake. However, smiling can be different with animals. When smiling, the teeth shows, but sometimes animals do this when they are threatening. When chimpanzees show their teeth, it can also be a sign of fear.\nDimples.\nDimples are genetically inherited. They are caused by the flesh underneath the skin, that forms on some people's cheeks, especially when they smile. Some people may only have one dimple on only one side of the face.\nDuchenne smile.\nAlthough there are many different types of smiles, researchers are interested in the duchenne smile because it is done with the eyes. The Duchenne smile was named after the French physician Guillaume Duchenne. Duchenne identified two types of smiles. A Duchenne smile is when the cheek raises and forms a wrinkle around the eyes. Many researchers think that Duchenne smiles are usually hard to make when you are pretending to smile.\nInternet.\nOn the Internet, smiles can normally be typed up. This is normally called a smiley, smiley face, or happy face. Smileys show emotion when people are not able to see it in real life. Smileys typed on the computer are called emoticons. Smileys can change depending on where the person typing the smiley is.\nWestern Style: :-), :-(, ;-), :-O, :-D, (;D)\nEastern Style: d(^.^)b, \\(^o^)/, &gt;.&lt;, ^_^, *&lt;):)"}
{"id": "20578", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20578", "title": "States of Brazil", "text": ""}
{"id": "20583", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20583", "title": "Maceio", "text": ""}
{"id": "20584", "revid": "11594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20584", "title": "Apatheists", "text": ""}
{"id": "20588", "revid": "156271", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20588", "title": "Parasites", "text": ""}
{"id": "20591", "revid": "6988426", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20591", "title": "S\u0142upsk", "text": "S\u0142upsk is a city in northern Poland in Pomeranian Voivodeship. It has about 100.000 inhabitants and 43,15\u00a0km\u00b2."}
{"id": "20592", "revid": "94773", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20592", "title": "Slupsk", "text": ""}
{"id": "20596", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20596", "title": "Motor", "text": ""}
{"id": "20598", "revid": "4847170", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20598", "title": "Emperor of Ethiopia", "text": "The Emperor of Ethiopia was the name of the ruler of Ethiopia until 1975 when the emperors and the royal family, the Solomonids, were taken out of power.\nThe name that was used for \"Emperor\" by the Ethiopians means \"King of Kings\"."}
{"id": "20599", "revid": "7677395", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20599", "title": "Solomonid dynasty", "text": "The Solomonid dynasty was a line of emperors that ruled in Ethiopia from 1270 to 1975. There were some other emperors that ruled who were not from the Solomonid dynasty, but the Solomonids were in control most of the time. \nThe emperors did not use their real name when they became Emperor of Ethiopia, but they made up a new one for their rule. For example, the first Emperor of the Solomonids was Yekuno Amlak. But he used the name \"Tasfa Iyassus\" after he became ruler. \nThe dynasty began in 1270, when Yekuno Amlak killed the last king of the Zagwe dynasty, which had ruled Ethiopia. Yekuno Amlak was made king, and European historians say was the first ruler of the dynasty. But most Ethiopian books say that Menelik I, the son of King Solomon of Israel and the Queen of Sheba, was the first Emperor of this dynasty.\nThe leaders of Ethiopa from 1270 to 1975 (mostly Solomonids):"}
{"id": "20601", "revid": "625332", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20601", "title": "The Sound of Music", "text": "The Sound of Music is a musical. It was based on a 1956 German movie, \"Die Trapp-Familie\" and \"The Story of the Trapp Family Singers\" by Maria von Trapp. The book was written by Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse. The lyrics were written by Oscar Hammerstein II. The music was written by Richard Rodgers. It was the last musical written by Rodgers and Hammerstein. Hammerstein died nine months after the Broadway opening.\nStory.\nA young Austrian woman named Maria Rainer becomes the governess to the children of Captain Georg von Trapp, a widow. The children included Liesl (16), Fredrich (14), Louisa (13), Kurt (10 or 11), Brigitta (9), Marta (7) and Gretl (5). Maria teaches the children how to sing, during the famous song \"Do Re Mi\". The captain and Maria fall in love and marry. Von Trapp refuses to join the Nazis and escapes from the Salzburg Festival, where his family performed. The story ends with Maria and her family leaving from Austria to Switzerland.\nProductions.\n\"The Sound of Music\" was released on 16 November 1959 at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre on Broadway. It starred Mary Martin as Maria and Theodore Bikel as Captain von Trapp. It moved to the Mark Hellinger Theatre on 6 November 1962, and closed on 15 June 1963 after 1,443 performances. The musical opened on the West End at the Palace Theatre on 18 May 1961. It starred Jean Bayless as Maria and Roger Dann as Capt. von Trapp. The musical ran for 2,385 performances.\nAwards.\nThe musical won a Tony Award for Best Musical. \nAdaptations.\nThe musical was released as a 1965 movie starring Julie Andrews and Christopher Plummer."}
{"id": "20604", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20604", "title": "Academy Award for Best Picture", "text": "The Academy Award for Best Picture is one of the Academy Awards. Also called Oscars, the Academy Awards are given to people working in the movie industry by the American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS). The name of the award has changed over time. It was first Outstanding Picture in 1927. In 1930, the name was changed to Best Picture. It is still called that today.\nIn the list below are the winners of the award for each year. A list of the winners and other nominees is in the main article for each decade."}
{"id": "20605", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20605", "title": "Quetelet Index", "text": ""}
{"id": "20606", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20606", "title": "Slav", "text": ""}
{"id": "20607", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20607", "title": "Bulimia nervosa", "text": "Bulimia nervosa (bulimia) is a disease and a type of eating disorder. It is when a person eats large amounts of food then will force themself to vomit it up or purge. Other ways that they get it out of their body include laxatives and exercising. Most who have it feel that they are fat and want to be skinny.\nSymptoms.\nMost people with bulimia eat large amounts of food then make themselves vomit or purge. Typically, they will do this at least once a week or more often. Bulimic people often think about how their bodies look, and usually, the motive behind purging is the want to be skinny. The person may also have anorexia nervosa. However, most with bulimia have a normal weight or are overweight, which makes it difficult to know when someone has bulimia from just simply looking at them. It is also common to have calluses or bruising on the fingers from purging.\nRisks.\nBulimia nervosa can cause many health problems. Because vomit has lots of acid in it, purging frequently can burn the person's mouth, throat, or teeth. One can lose nutrients or fluids in their body. Glands in one's throat and face may get larger and hurt. The immune system is weakened, as well as the possibility of muscle or heart problems.\nSometimes bulimia can cause difficulty breathing. This is because the acids that are in your mouth go to your lungs and damage the bronchioles. There is also feedback to the ego and a social stigma that may cause further psychological impact.\nStatistics.\nMost people who have bulimia are between the ages of 10 to 25. It is more common in females than it is in males. People who have had past trauma are more likely to be bulimic. People with obsessive compulsive disorder or perfectionism are also likely to have bulimia."}
{"id": "20609", "revid": "1136733", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20609", "title": "Turks and Caicos Islands", "text": "The Turks and Caicos Islands are two groups of islands in the Caribbean Sea, near the Bahamas. The islands lie southeast of Mayaguana in the Bahamas island chain and north of the island of Hispaniola. Cockburn Town, the capital since 1766, is in the Grand Turk Island about east-southeast of Miami, United States.\nThe islands have a total land area of . and they are on a tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nGovernment.\nThe government of Great Britain is also the ruler of the Turks and Caicos, but that ruler always acts through a governor. There are local elections for premier (similar to a president). Government offices are in the Grand Turk Island.\nGeography.\nThe two island groups are in the North Atlantic Ocean, southeast of the Bahamas, north of Hispaniola, at . The Caicos Islands are separated by the Caicos Passage from the closest Bahamian islands, Mayaguana and Great Inagua.\nThe eight main islands and more than 299 smaller islands have a total land area of , consisting primarily of low, flat limestone with extensive marshes and mangrove swamps and of beach front. The weather is usually sunny and relatively dry, but hurricanes are frequent during summer. The islands have limited natural fresh water resources; private cisterns collect rainwater for drinking. The primary natural resources are spiny lobster, conch and other shellfish.\nTurks Islands.\nThe Turks Islands are separated from the Caicos Islands by Turks Island Passage, which is more than deep, The islands form a chain that goes from north to south.\nThere are only two inhabited islands, and these are:\nCaicos Islands.\nThe inhabited islands of the group are:\nClimate.\nTurks and Caicos Islands features a relatively dry and sunny marine tropical climate with relatively consistent temperatures throughout the course of the year. The temperature during summer rarely is over and during winter rarely is below .\nPopulation.\nDemographics.\nEight of the thirty islands in the territory are inhabited, with a total population in 2012 of 31,458: 16,037 males and 15,421 females. The population density is 214 persons per square mile.\nTotal population by island 2001-2012\nLanguage.\nThe official language of the islands is English and the population also speaks Turks and Caicos Islands Creole which is similar to Bahamian Creole. Due to its close proximity to Cuba and Hispaniola, large Haitian Creole and Spanish-speaking communities have developed in the territory due to immigration from Creole-speaking Haiti and from Spanish-speaking Cuba and Dominican Republic.\nReligion.\nThe people of Turks and Caicos was 72.8% Protestant (35.8% Baptists, 11.7% Church of God, 10% Anglicans, 9.3% Methodists, 6% Seventh-Day Adventists), 11.4% Catholics, 1.8% Jehovah's Witnesses, and 14% other.\nCities.\nThis is a list of cities in the Turks and Caicos Islands."}
{"id": "20610", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20610", "title": "Vichy France", "text": "The French State was the nominal government of all of France except for Alsace-Lorraine. It also governed the French colonial empire. It was led by Philippe P\u00e9tain, notable for helping to win World War I. When the French and British armies lost the Battle of Dunkirk and the rest of the Battle of France was being lost, the French Parliament made him Prime Minister. He negotiated an armistice with the Germans, agreeing to be neutral in World War II. P\u00e9tain became Head of State, effectively dictator, and usually did what the Germans told him to do. \nThe Axis powers militarily occupied northern France and part of the southeast. The Vichy government, as a client state of Germany, controlled the unoccupied parts of France until November1942. The German army ran the Northern half. In 1944, the Vichy government, now effectively a puppet state, moved to Nazi Germany, and later disbanded. It became known as Vichy France after World War II."}
{"id": "20611", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20611", "title": "Anguilla", "text": "Anguilla is a group of five islands in the Caribbean Sea. The islands are ruled by the United Kingdom.\nAnguilla was colonized by the British Empire and used to be part of what is now Saint Kitts and Nevis, but broke away in 1980 so it could stay part of Great Britain. Saint Kitts and Nevis wanted to be independent.\nIt is named after the Spanish word for \"eel\", because it has such a shape.\nPolitics.\nThe King or Queen of the United Kingdom is the ruler of Anguilla, but she works through a governor. He or she names, or \"appoints\" the governor, and he is just working there in place of the monarch. The legislature is elected by the people, has 11 members, and is called the House of Assembly.\nEconomy.\nAnguilla has mostly been part of the British Empire since the 17th century. The British brought thousands of slaves from Africa and forced them to work, like they did all over the Caribbean and North America. Many of the slaves decided to run away rather than be forced to work. When the British decided to abolish slavery they paid all the slave owners a lot of money, but didn't give anything to the slaves. Now Anguilla gets most of its money from fishing and tourism.\nCulture.\nMost people in Anguilla are Protestants, and speak English."}
{"id": "20612", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20612", "title": "Bermuda", "text": "Bermuda (/b\u025cr\u02c8mju\u02d0d\u0259/ \"Ber-myu-dah\"; officially, the Bermudas or Somers Islands) is a British overseas territory in the North Atlantic Ocean. The land has one main island and 180 smaller islands. Bermuda is a popular tourist place, with mild weather during the winter months.\nOff the east coast of the United States, Bermuda's nearest landmass is Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, about 1,030 kilometres (640\u00a0mi) to the west-northwest. It is about 1,373 kilometres (853\u00a0mi) south of Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, and 1,770 kilometres (1,100\u00a0mi) northeast of Miami, Florida. Its capital city is Hamilton.\nHistory.\n in 1505 by Spanish navigator Juan de Berm\u00fadez (who said it to be inhabited only with pigs), after whom the islands are named. Berm\u00fadez claimed it for the Spanish Empire. Unoccupied, the island was settled by England in 1609, making it the oldest and most populous remaining British overseas territory. Its first capital, St George's, was founded in 1612 and is the oldest continuously inhabited English town in the Americas.\nGeography.\nThe country is in the Atlantic Ocean, near the western edge of the Sargasso Sea. It is about 580 nautical miles (1070\u00a0km, 670\u00a0mi) east-southeast of Cape Hatteras on the Outer Banks of North Carolina and about 590 nautical miles (1100\u00a0km, 690\u00a0mi) southeast of Martha's Vineyard. The island is due east of Fripp Island, South Carolina. It has 103\u00a0km (64\u00a0mi) of coastline.\nThe territory has 181 islands. The total area is 53.3 square kilometres (20.6\u00a0sq\u00a0mi). The largest island is \"Main Island\", sometimes itself called \"Bermuda\".\nClimate.\nBermuda has a subtropical climate. The weather is humid and, as a result, the summertime heat index can be high, even though mid-August temperatures rarely exceed Winters are mild, with average daytime temperatures in January and February around The temperature rarely drops below 10\u00a0\u00b0C \nBermuda is very likely to be affected by hurricanes. The island's small size means that direct landfalls are rare. The last hurricane to cause significant damage to Bermuda was category 3 Hurricane Fabian on 5 September 2003.\nThe only source of fresh water in Bermuda is rainfall. It is collected on roofs and catchments and stored in tanks. Each home usually has at least one of these tanks forming part of its foundation.\nFlora and fauna.\nWhen discovered, Bermuda had no people. It was mostly covered by forests of Bermuda cedar, with mangrove marshes along its shores. Only 165 of the island's current 1000 vascular plant species are considered native. Of those 15, including the cedar, are endemic.\nMany species of palm trees have been introduced to Bermuda. Coconut palms grow there, making it the furthest north place for the natural growth of this species. While coconuts grow on Bermuda, the lack of heat does not usually let them properly set fruit.\nThe only indigenous mammals of Bermuda are five species of bats. All of these bats are also in the eastern United States \u2014 \"Lasionycteris noctivagans\", \"Lasiurus borealis\", \"Lasiurus cinereus\", \"Lasiurus seminolus\" and \"Perimyotis subflavus\". Other commonly known fauna of Bermuda includes its national bird, the Bermuda Petrel, and the Bermuda Rock Skink. The skink was long thought to have been the only indigenous land vertebrate of Bermuda. It has recently been discovered, however, that a species of terrapin predated the arrival of humans on the archipelago.\nParishes and municipalities.\nBermuda is divided into nine parishes and two municipalities.\nBermuda's nine parishes:\nBermuda's two municipalities:\nBermuda's two informal villages:\nDespite their names, Jones Village (in Warwick), Cashew City (St. George's), Claytown (Hamilton), Middle Town (Pembroke) and Tucker's Town (St. George's) are merely neighborhoods. Dandy Town and North Village are sports clubs and Harbour View Village is a small public housing development.\nEconomy.\nBermuda has a wealthy economy, with finance as its largest sector, followed by tourism. In 2005, Bermuda was even claimed to have the world's highest GDP per capita, yet these statistics are hard to verify as Bermuda is not classified as a country but rather as a territory of the U.K.\nMain sights.\nBermuda's pink sand beaches and clear, cerulean blue ocean waters are popular with tourists. Many of Bermuda's hotels are along the south shore of the island. In addition to its beaches, there are a number of sightseeing attractions. Historic St George's is a World Heritage Site. Scuba divers can explore many wrecks and coral reefs in shallow water (typically in depth) with nearly unlimited visibility. Many nearby reefs are easy to access from shore by snorkellers, especially at Church Bay.\nBermuda's most popular visitor attraction is the Royal Naval Dockyard. It includes the Bermuda Maritime Museum. Other attractions include the Bermuda Aquarium, Museum and Zoo, Bermuda Underwater Exploration Institute, the Botanical Gardens, lighthouses, and the Crystal Caves with its impressive stalactites and underground saltwater pools.\nIt is not possible to rent a car on the island. However, visitors can hire motor scooters for use as private transport, or use public transport.\nArts and culture.\nBermuda has produced, or been home to, actors such as Oona O'Neill, Earl Cameron, Diana Dill, Lena Headey, Will Kempe, and most famously, Michael Douglas and Catherine Zeta-Jones. Other movie and television personalities who were born, or have lived, in Bermuda include producer Arthur Rankin, Jr., and cartoonist and Muppet man Michael Frith.\nMusic and dance are important in Bermuda. Noted musicians have included local icons The Talbot Brothers, who performed for many decades both in Bermuda and the United States, and were on Ed Sullivan's televised variety show. Other musicians are jazz pianist Lance Hayward, singer-songwriter Heather Nova and her brother, Mishka, tenor Gary Burgess, classical musician and conductor Kenneth Amis, and more recently, dancehall artist Collie Buddz.\nIn 1979, Gina Swainson was crowned \"Miss World\".\nSports.\nBermuda's national cricket team was in the Cricket World Cup 2007 in the West Indies. Their most famous player is Dwayne Leverock. Also very well known is David Hemp. The yearly \"Cup Match\" cricket tournament between rival parishes St George's in the east and Somerset in the west is the time for a popular national holiday.\nIn 2007 Bermuda hosted the 25th PGA Grand Slam of Golf. The event returned to Bermuda again in 2008 and 2009. Bermudian Quinn Talbot was once the World one-armed golf champion.\nThe Government said in 2006 that it will provide substantial financial support to Bermuda's cricket and football teams. Bermuda's most famous footballers include Clyde Best, Shaun Goater, Reggie Lambe, Sam Nusum and Ralph Bean. In 2006, the Bermuda Hogges were formed as the nation's first professional football team. The team plays in the United Soccer Leagues Second Division.\nSailing, fishing, and equestrian sports are popular with both residents and visitors alike. The Newport\u2013Bermuda Yacht Race is a more than 100-year-old tradition. A sport unique to Bermuda is racing the Bermuda Fitted Dinghy. International One Design racing also started in Bermuda.\nAt the 2004 Summer Olympics, Bermuda competed in sailing, athletics, swimming, diving, triathlon and equestrian events. In those Olympics, Bermuda's Katura Horton-Perinchief made history by becoming the first black female diver in the Olympic Games. Bermuda has had one Olympic medallist, Clarence Hill. Hill won a bronze medal in boxing. Bermuda also was in Men's Skeleton at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy. Jillian Teceira was in the Beijing Olympics in 2008. Bermuda also competes in the biennial Island Games. It will host in 2013.\nBermuda has a proud Rugby Union community. The Bermuda Rugby Union team won the 2011 Caribbean championships \u2013 defeating Guyana in the final.\nBermuda Triangle.\nBermuda is the easternmost point of the so-called \"Bermuda Triangle\"\u2013 a region of sea in which a number of aircraft and ships have allegedly disappeared under mysterious circumstances. Some people think there is a pattern to the disappearances, while other people think it is only coincidence."}
{"id": "20613", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20613", "title": "Tarja Halonen", "text": "Tarja Halonen (born December 24, 1943) is the former President of Finland. She is from Helsinki. She was elected in 2000 and 2006. Her mandate ended in 2012 and she left office on 1 March 2012."}
{"id": "20614", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20614", "title": "Turku", "text": "Turku () is a city in Southwest Finland. It is the fifth-largest city in Finland, with a population of around 190,000.\nIt is next to the municipalities of Aura, Kaarina, Lieto, Masku, Myn\u00e4m\u00e4ki, Naantali, Nousiainen, P\u00f6yty\u00e4, Raisio and Rusko.\nThe official languages spoken in Turku are Finnish and Swedish.\nThe harbour of Turku is an important port. Many ships go from there to Mariehamn and to Stockholm. Turku Airport is also one of Finland's busiest airports.\nTurku is located near the mouth of Aura river, and is spread on either side of the river. There are ten bridges over the Aura river in Turku. \nHistory.\nTurku is the oldest city in the country. it was founded in 13th century, when Finland was part of the Kingdom of Sweden. It used to be the largest city and capital of Finland. From 1809 Russia ruled Finland, and in 1812 the government moved to Helsinki. A big fire destroyed much of Turku in 1827. After that, even the university moved to Helsinki.\nThe first school in Finland was established in Turku, the old Cathedral school in 13th century. The first university in Finland, \"The Royal Academy of Turku\" was established in the city in 1640, but it has moved to Helsinki and become the University of Helsinki. Now there are five universities in Turku: three in Finnish language and two in Swedish language."}
{"id": "20615", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20615", "title": "MASH (movie)", "text": ""}
{"id": "20616", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20616", "title": "Wings (movie)", "text": "Wings is a silent movie released in 1927. It is most famous as the first movie to win the Academy Award for Best Picture.\nPlot.\nJack Powell (Charles \"Buddy\" Rogers) and David Armstrong (Richard Arlen) are rivals in the same small American town, both vying for the attentions of pretty Sylvia Lewis (Jobyna Ralston). Jack fails to realize that \"the girl next door\", Mary Preston (Clara Bow), is desperately in love with him. The two young men both enlist to become combat pilots in the Air Service. When they leave for training camp, Jack mistakenly believes Sylvia prefers him; she actually prefers David and lets him know about her feelings, but is too kindhearted to turn down Jack's affection.\nJack and David are billeted together. Their tent mate is Cadet White (Gary Cooper), but their acquaintance is all too brief; White is killed in an air crash the same day. Undaunted, the two men endure a rigorous training period, where they go from being enemies to best friends. Upon graduating, they are shipped off to France to fight the Germans.\nMary joins the war effort by becoming an ambulance driver. She later learns of Jack's reputation as an ace and encounters him while on leave in Paris. She finds him, but he is too drunk to recognize her. She puts him to bed, but when two Military Police barge in while she is innocently changing from a borrowed dress back into her uniform in the same room, she is forced to resign and return to America.\nThe climax of the story comes with the epic Battle of Saint-Mihiel. David is shot down and presumed dead. However, he survives the crash landing, steals a German biplane, and heads for the Allied lines. By a tragic stroke of bad luck, he is spotted and shot down by Jack, who is bent on avenging his friend. When Jack lands to pick up a souvenir, he becomes distraught when he learns what he has done, but before David dies, he forgives his comrade.\nWith the end of the war, Jack returns home to a hero's welcome. When he returns David's effects to his grieving parents, David's mother blames the war, not Jack, for her son's death. Then, Jack is reunited with Mary and realizes he loves her."}
{"id": "20617", "revid": "7632634", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20617", "title": "Sunrise (movie)", "text": "Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans or Sunrise is a 1927 silent movie. It is the only movie to ever win Academy Award for Unique and Artistic Production. This category was not used again. It won the award for Best Cinematography and actress, Janet Gaynor, won the Best Actress award. It was the first to improvise a primitive version of CGI using nuclear warheads. It was directed by F.W. Murnau."}
{"id": "20618", "revid": "7888761", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20618", "title": "The Broadway Melody", "text": "The Broadway Melody is one of the first Hollywood musical movies. It was released in 1929. It made more money than any movie that year. It also won the Academy Award for Best Picture."}
{"id": "20619", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20619", "title": "Rocky", "text": "Rocky is a 1976 American sports drama movie. It was written by, and starred, Sylvester Stallone. The movie is about a man living in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, who is trying to become a great boxer.\nIt won three Academy Awards and was ranked #78 in AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list. It was followed by 5 sequels, the most recent came out in 2006.\nThe movie was made on a budget of less than $1 million. It was shot in 28 days. Many people liked the movie. It turned Stallone into a major star.\nCast.\nBoxer Joe Frazier has a cameo appearance in the movie. Due to the movie's low budget, members of Stallone's family played minor roles. Michael Dorn made his acting debut as Creed's bodyguard.\nAwards.\n\"Rocky\" received ten Academy Awards nominations in nine categories, winning three:\nThe Directors Guild of America awarded \"Rocky\" its annual award for best movie of the year. It was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay. The Writers Guild of America Award selected it as the 78th best screenplay of all time."}
{"id": "20620", "revid": "217550", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20620", "title": "The Deer Hunter", "text": "The Deer Hunter is a 1978 American war drama movie. It is set from 1967-1975 and is about three friends from Pennsylvania affected by the Vietnam War.\nThe movie won five Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director. It was named by the American Film Institute as the 53rd Greatest Movie of All Time. It was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay. In 1996, \"The Deer Hunter\" was picked to keep in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress.\nRelease.\n\"Deer Hunter\" was shown at one theater each in New York and Los Angeles for a week on December 8, 1978. The release was to qualify the movie for the Oscars. And one week would build interest. After the Oscar nominations, Universal widened the distribution to include major cities. A full-scale release was on February 23, 1979, just following the Oscars.\nReception.\nThe movie's first reviews were largely enthusiastic. Many critics said it was the best American epic since Francis Ford Coppola's \"The Godfather\". Some people though did not like how the movie used Russian roulette.\nMany people did not like Cimino's next movie, \"Heaven's Gate\". Because they thought it was so bad, they also changed their thoughts on \"The Deer Hunter\". Instead of liking the movie people said they did not like it anymore."}
{"id": "20624", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20624", "title": "Tailor", "text": "A tailor is a person whose job is to make clothes to fit people. A tailor might make a new piece of clothing, or change an item so that it fits better. They also mend (fix) clothes. A tailor is also called a seamster, or a seamstress for a woman."}
{"id": "20625", "revid": "10700", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20625", "title": "Template", "text": "A template is a tool that shows the shape of something or it is a tool to help make something. It can separate the form of something from the things inside it.\nIn drawing, a template can be a wood, plastic or metal tool that is used to help make marks with a pen or pencil. Lines can be drawn on paper, or on metal or wood to make the same shape many times.\nIn publishing for example, a template is a layout made by someone else to give an idea what to write in different parts of a book or story. A simple publishing template can have spaces for the words, for pictures, for the story title (name), and for the name of the publication.\nHumans or machines can use templates. Some computer programs that work with the Internet use a template to separate the way the program works from the way it shows the words and pictures. It can be a way to copy words and pictures. In computer programming, templates save time because the programmer does not need to write the same words over and over.\nWhen doctors plan to give a person a new bone joint made of metal or plastic, they can use a template in the shape of the new joint. This type of template is put on an x-ray picture of the person to help to decide the size of joint needed."}
{"id": "20626", "revid": "5403193", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20626", "title": "Oliver!", "text": "Oliver! is a musical. It is based on the novel, \"Oliver Twist\" by Charles Dickens. The book, lyrics, and music were written by Lionel Bart.\nPremieres.\n\"Oliver!\" had its world premiere on 30 June 1960 at the New Theatre in the West End. It ran for 2621 performances. The musical was directed by Peter Coe, and choreographed by Malcolm Clare. It starred Ron Moody as Fagin, Georgia Brown as Nancy, Martin Horsey as Dodger, and Keith Hamshere as Oliver.\n\"Oliver!\" opened on Broadway at the Imperial Theatre on 6 January 1963. Georgia Brown reprised her role as Nancy, Clive Revill played Fagin, Davy Jones played Dodger, and Bruce Prochnik played Oliver. It won three Tony Awards including Best Original Score.\nAdaptations.\nIn 1968, the musical was adapted to a movie of the same name. The movie won the Academy Award for Best Picture."}
{"id": "20627", "revid": "598824", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20627", "title": "Patton (disambiguation)", "text": "George S. Patton was a United States Army general during World War II\nPatton can also mean:"}
{"id": "20628", "revid": "793", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20628", "title": "Dr. Hook", "text": ""}
{"id": "20629", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20629", "title": "Dr. Hook &amp; The Medicine Show", "text": "Dr. Hook &amp; The Medicine Show or simply just Dr. Hook was an American band. They formed in Union City, New Jersey in 1968. Their two best known songs were \"Cover of the Rolling Stone\" and \"Sylvia's Mother\"."}
{"id": "20630", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20630", "title": "Glider", "text": "Gliders are aircrafts which do not have a motor. Gliders are controlled by their pilots by using control-sticks. Some gliders can only carry one person; others can carry two. In gliders with two seats, each pilot has a control-stick. Gliders always have seats for the pilots.\n'Sailplanes' are gliders with long wings so that they will only lose height slowly. In some places a vertical draft makes the air go up faster than the glider is going down. The pilot of a glider can make it climb by flying to these places. This is called soaring. Good pilots can travel long distances by always finding rising air. Some pilots race each other over hundreds of kilometres each day. Other pilots just fly for fun.\nGliders cannot get into the air by themselves. They are pulled into the air by an aircraft with a motor or they are pulled up by motor on the ground.\nThere are two other types of gliders. Hang-gliders have frames to give the wings their shape, but do not have seats for their pilots and do not have control-sticks. The wings of paragliders are like parachutes and so do not have frames to give them their shape. These other two types of glider are often launched from the tops of hills or cliffs."}
{"id": "20631", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20631", "title": "Cells", "text": ""}
{"id": "20633", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20633", "title": "Elections", "text": ""}
{"id": "20637", "revid": "610487", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20637", "title": "John Stuart Mill", "text": "John Stuart Mill (20 May 1806 \u2013 8 May 1873) was an English philosopher and political economist. He was a classical liberal thinker of the 19th century. He was for utilitarianism, the ethical theory first proposed by his third godfather Jeremy Bentham.\nAs a utilitarian, he believed that the good of society as a whole is more important than the pleasure of one or a few individuals."}
{"id": "20638", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20638", "title": "Jeremy Bentham", "text": "Jeremy Bentham (15 February 1748 \u2013 6 June 1832) was an English, jurist, philosopher, and legal and social reformer. He is best known as one of the first people to be for utilitarianism and animal rights and gay rights. \nBentham was one of the most influential (classical) liberals, partially through his writings but particularly through his students all around the world, including John Stuart Mill and several political leaders (and Robert Owen, who later started the idea of socialism). He is believed to be the innovator of classical liberalism, a term first coined in the 19th century. After he died, his body was preserved and is on public display at University College London to this day."}
{"id": "20644", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20644", "title": "Dinosaur Comics", "text": "Dinosaur Comics is a comic by Ryan North. It shows dinosaurs who have adventures and talk about philosophy and some other topics. The art is the same every day, but the words are different. This comic is intended to be funny.\nThings in the comic that are not true: "}
{"id": "20646", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20646", "title": "Lucid dream", "text": "A lucid dream is essentially a dream in which the person is aware that he is in the dream. In a lucid dream, the person does not have to be in control of his surroundings for the dream to be lucid, and only being aware of the dream itself is sufficient condition for the dream to be described as lucid. \nThe art of lucid dreaming is the art of being able to control your surroundings in the dream itself. People who lucid dream can usually control everything that happens in their dream. They can teleport, fly, make something appear, or even make everything disappear. Regular lucid dreamers usually do so for spiritual reasons but there certainly are people who do it for fun or to avoid bad dreams.\nWays to lucid dream.\nAlthough some people can have lucid dreams without trying, most people do not have them often. It is important to be able to remember dreams, because if the dreamer does not remember them, he or she will not know if they were lucid dreams or not. Remembering dreams becomes easier if they are written in a dream diary upon waking up. \nThere are some ways that help make lucid dreams more likely. Stephen LaBerge, a psychologist who studies lucid dreams, made the MILD (mnemonic induction of lucid dreaming) technique. To do this, the dreamer must wake up after having a dream, and visualise himself or herself being in the dream again, except now knowing it is a dream. The dreamer should think \"the next time I am dreaming, I want to remember I am dreaming\", and should concentrate on this while returning to sleep.\nThere are many other ways to help someone lucid dream. One other way is to fall asleep while keeping the mind awake. This is called the WILD (wake induced lucid dreaming) technique. It is easiest to perform after waking up from a few hours of sleep."}
{"id": "20659", "revid": "6568626", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20659", "title": "My Fair Lady", "text": "My Fair Lady is a musical. It is based on George Bernard Shaw's play, \"Pygmalion\", and on the movie adaptation of the play starring Wendy Hiller and Leslie Howard. The book and lyrics for the musical were written by Alan Jay Lerner. The music was written by Frederick Loewe. \nSynopsis.\nThe common flower girl, \"Eliza Doolittle\", tells us of the simple pleasures she would like in life (a warm room, an enormous chair, chocolate, someone who cares for her) and how much she would appreciate these little things. As Eliza grew up on the streets of London, she has a strong cockney accent (therefore pronouncing \u2018lovely\u2019 as \u2018loverly\u2019), the phoneticist, \"Professor Henry Higgins\", overhears her and he places a bet that he can turn Eliza into a lady within the space of a year. \nProductions.\nThe musical premiered on Broadway on 15 March 1956 at the Mark Hellinger Theatre. It moved to other theatres in New York during its original run, and closed on 29 September 1962 after 2,717 performances. It starred Rex Harrison, Julie Andrews, Robert Coote, and Stanley Holloway. It was directed by Moss Hart. \nThe West End production opened on 30 April 1958 at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. Harrison, Andrews, Coote, and Holloway played their Broadway roles. It ran for five and one-half years for 2,281 performances.\nAwards.\nThe musical won the Tony Award for Best Musical. \nAdaptations.\nThe musical was made into a movie in 1964 starring Audrey Hepburn and Rex Harrison. "}
{"id": "20660", "revid": "170917", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20660", "title": "A Man for All Seasons", "text": "A Man for All Seasons is a play by Robert Bolt about the life of Sir Thomas More that was first put on in 1960. It was made into a movie in 1966 that won the Best Picture Academy Award that year. It was also made into a TV movie in 1988."}
{"id": "20662", "revid": "6380352", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20662", "title": "Composite number", "text": "A composite number (or simply a \"composite\") is a natural number, that can be found by multiplying prime numbers.\nFor example, the number \"9\" can be found by multiplying \"3\" by \"3\". Another example is the number \"12\", which is obtained by multiplying \"3\", \"2\" and \"2\".\nAll natural numbers (greater than 1) can be put in one of the two classes below:"}
{"id": "20663", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20663", "title": "Fundamental theorem of arithmetic", "text": "The Fundamental theorem of arithmetic (also called the unique factorization theorem) is a theorem of number theory. The theorem says that \"every\" positive integer greater than 1 can be written as a product of prime numbers (or the integer is itself a prime number). The theorem also says that there is only one way to write the number. If two people found two different ways to write the number, the only thing that can be different is the order in which the primes are written. For example, we can write:\nand if somebody else finds \"another\" way to write 6936 or 1200 as product of prime numbers, we can put those prime numbers in the right order and find out that it is the same as what we have here. Finding the prime numbers is called factorization. \nThis theorem can be used in cryptography.\nProof.\nThe first person who proved the theorem was Euclid. The first detailed and correct proof was in the \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" by Carl Friedrich Gau\u00df. \nSome people may think that the theorem is true everywhere. However, the theorem is \"not\" true in more general number systems, like . This was first mentioned by Ernst Kummer in 1843, in his work on Fermat's last theorem. For more information about that: read . \nThe proof consists of two parts: \"first\" we show that every number can be written as a product of primes; \"second\" we show that if we write a number as a product of primes for a second time, then the two lists of prime numbers must be the same. \nFirst part of the proof.\nWe show that if \"not\" every number greater than 1 can be written as a product of primes, we end up in some kind of impossibility. So after that we conclude that it \"must\" be true that every number can be written as a product of primes. \nSo, now see what happens when somebody says that he/she knows a positive integer, greater than 1, which can \"not\" be written as a product of primes. In that case we ask him/her to mention \"all\" the numbers, greater than 1, that can \"not\" be written as a product of primes. One of these numbers must be the \"smallest\": let's call it \"n\". Of course, this number \"n\" cannot be 1. Further, it cannot be a prime number, because a prime number is a 'product' of a single prime: itself. So it \"must\" be a product of numbers. Thus- \nwhere both \"a\" and \"b\" are positive integers that are of course smaller than \"n\". But: \"n\" was the \"smallest\" number that can not be written as a product of primes. So it must be possible to write \"a\" and \"b\" as products of primes, because they are both smaller than \"n\". But then the product \ncan be written as a product of primes as well. This is an impossibility because we said that \"n\" can not be written as a product of primes. \nWe have now shown the impossibility which exists if the first part of the theorem would not be true. In this way we have now proven the first part of the theorem. \nSecond part of the proof.\nNow we have to prove that there is only one way to write a positive number greater than 1 as a product of prime numbers. \nTo do this, we use the following lemma: if a prime number \"p\" divides a product \"ab\", then it divides \"a\" or it divides \"b\" (Euclid's lemma). \nFirst we now prove this lemma. Well, assume now that \"p\" does not divide \"a\". Then \"p\" and \"a\" are coprime and we have that says that there must be integers \"x\" and \"y\" such that \nMultiplying everything with \"b\" gives \nRemember that \"ab\" could be divided by \"p\". So now, on the left-hand side we have two terms that are divisible by \"p\". So the term on the right-hand side is also divisible by \"p\". We have now proven that if \"p\" does not divide \"a\", it must divide \"b\". That proves the lemma. \nNow we will prove that we can write an integer greater than 1 in \"only one\" way as a product of prime numbers. Take two products of primes \"A\" and \"B\" which have the same outcome. So we know for the outcome of the products that \"A\" = \"B\". Take any prime \"p\" from the first product \"A\". It divides the \"A\", so it also divides \"B\". Using several times the lemma that we just proved, we can see that \"p\" must then divide at least one factor \"b\" of \"B\". But the factors are all primes themselves, so also \"b\" is prime. But we know that \"p\" is also prime, so \"p\" must be equal to \"b\". So now we divide \"A\" by \"p\" and also divide \"B\" by \"p\". And we get a result like \"A*\" = \"B*\". Again we can take a prime \"p\" from the first product \"A*\" and find out that is equal to some number in the product \"B*\". Continuing in this way, at the end we see that the prime factors of the two products must be exactly the same. This proves that we can write a positive integer as a product of primes in only one unique way."}
{"id": "20666", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20666", "title": "A Portuguesa", "text": "\"A Portuguesa\" ( [\u0250 pu\u027etu\u02c8\u0263ez\u0250] ), meaning \"Song of the Portuguese\" ( 'The Portuguese [Song]') is the national anthem of Portugal, adopted in 1911. It was composed by Alfredo Keil, and its lyrics (words) were written by Henrique Lopes de Mendon\u00e7a in response to the British Ultimatum for Portuguese troops to get rid of their positions in Africa between the (now former) colonies of Mozambique and Angola in the (also known as the Pink Map)."}
{"id": "20667", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20667", "title": "Welding", "text": "Welding is a way of heating pieces of metal using electricity or a flame so that they melt and stick together. There are many kinds of welding, including arc welding, resistance welding, and gas welding. The most common type is arc welding. Anyone who is near arc welding needs to wear a special helmet or goggles because the arc is so bright. Looking at the arc without visual protection may cause permanent eye damage. It is also important to cover all your skin because it can give you something like a sunburn. Hot sparks from the weld can burn any skin that is showing. One kind of welding that does not use an arc is Oxy-fuel welding (OFW), sometimes called gas welding. OFW uses a flame to heat up the metal. There are other kinds of welding that do not use an arc.\nArc Welding.\nAny welding process that utilizes an electric arc is known as arc welding. The common forms of arc welding include: \nArc welding heats metals by making a high-current electric arc between pieces of metal to be joined and an electrode.\nUse of the electrode varies based on the type of welding process. In SMAW, GMAW, and related welding processes, the electrode is consumed and becomes part of the weld. The electrode is usually made of the same kind of metal to be welded. Because the electrode is consumed by the welding process, the electrode must constantly be fed into the weld. The SMAW welding process features a \"stick\" electrode impregnated with a weld promoter known as flux, clamped to the end.\nThe GMAW welding process uses a thin wire on a rotating spool, as a continuous electrode. The size of this electrode varies from around 0.635 millimeters to about 4 millimeters. The welding machine has a motor-driven spool inside that feeds the wire electrode into the weld.\nThe TIG welding (GTAW) process features an electrode that is not consumed by the welding process as the metal that makes up the weld does not have any electricity flowing through it. The electrode is made of Tungsten, so used as it will not melt while immersed in the electrical arc. A filler metal, in the form of a rod, can be used to add metal to the weld area.\nAlmost all welding uses filler metal to fill in the small gap between the metal pieces. The extra metal helps to make the weld strong. Sometimes welds need to be made without any filler metal. Welding with no filler metal is called autogenous welding.\nShielding in arc welding.\nAll types of welding require that the hot metal have protection. Dirt, rust, grease, and even the oxidation of the metal under the weld process can prevent a proper weld joint. As such all weld processes use one of two protection methods: flux, and shielding gas.\nWelding flux may be used in a solid, liquid, or paste form. During welding, the flux will melt and some of it will evaporate. This creates a small pocket of gas around the weld. This pocket of gas prevents oxidation of the metal under weld. Melted flux, through a corrosive reaction, cleans contaminants that prevent a proper weld. After welding, the flux solidifies. This layer of solid flux is called slag, and must be removed from the weld. The SMAW weld process most commonly uses flux, and is most commonly used on steel.\nShielding gas protects the weld by being a pocket of gas around the weld. The purpose of this gas is to keep normal air out, especially oxygen. It is different from flux because there is no liquid on the weld. There is only a gas around the weld. Because there is no liquid, it will not clean up dirt and other things on the metal. This means that the metal has to be clean before it is welded. If it is not, the dirt and other things could cause problems. The gases that are usually used are argon, helium, and a mixture that is 3 parts argon and one part carbon dioxide. Other mixtures of gases can have nitrogen, hydrogen, or even a little bit of oxygen in them. One kind of welding that uses shielding gas is gas metal arc welding. It is usually used in factories to make things.\nWelding that uses flux is easier to do outside when it is windy. This is because the liquid flux is protecting the hot metal and it will not blow away. Also, the flux is always making the pocket of gas which keeps the electric arc from going out. Welding that uses shielding gas usually cannot be used outside because the gas would blow away if there were any wind.\nOther kinds of welding.\nSome kinds of welding do not use an electric arc. They might use a flame, electricity without an arc, an energy beam, or physical force. The most common type of welding that does not use an arc is called gas welding. In gas welding, a flammable(meaning it will burn) gas and oxygen are combined and burn at the end of a torch. Gas welding does not need any special shielding because a flame which is adjusted right has no extra oxygen in it. It is still important to make sure the metal is clean. The flame heats up the metal so much that it melts. When both the pieces of metal are melted at the edge, the liquid metal becomes one piece.\nThe other kind of welding that does not use an arc still uses electricity. It is called resistance welding. With this kind, two pieces of thin metal are pinched together and then electricity is made to go through them. This makes the metal get really hot and melt where it is pinched together. The two pieces melt together at that place. Sometimes this is called spot welding because the welding can only happen at one small place(or spot) at a time.\nForge welding is the first kind of welding that ever was used. Forge welding needs the two pieces of metal to so hot that they almost melt. Then they are beat together with hammers until they are one piece.\nThe other kinds of welding that do not use an arc are hard to do, and usually new. They are expensive too. Most of these kinds of welding are only done where specially needed. They might use an electron beam, laser, or ultrasonic sound waves.\nEnergy for welding.\nEvery kind of welding needs to use energy. This energy is usually heat, but sometimes force is used to make a weld. When heat is used, it can be from electricity or from fire.\nPower supplies for arc welding.\nA lot of electricity is used in arc welding. Some kinds of welding use alternating current like the electricity that buildings use. Other kinds use direct current like the electricity in a car or most things with a battery. Almost all kinds of welding use a lower voltage than the electricity that comes from a power plant. Arc welding requires using a special power supply that makes the electricity from the power plant usable for welding. A power supply lowers the voltage and controls the amount of current. The power supply usually has controls on it that allow these things to be changed. For kinds of arc welding that use alternating current, sometimes the power supply can do special things to make the electricity alternate differently. Some power supplies do not plug into a power plug, but instead generate their own electricity. These kind of power supplies have an engine that turns a generator head to make the electricity. The engine might run on gasoline, diesel fuel, or propane.\nEnergy for other kinds of welding.\nOFW uses a flame from burning fuel gas and oxygen to heat up the metal. This fuel gas is almost always acetylene. Acetylene is a flammable gas that burns very hot, hotter than any other gas. That is why it is used most of the time. Other gases like propane, natural gas, or other industrial gases can be used too.\nSome kinds of welding do not use heat to make the weld. These kinds of welding can get hot, but they do not make the metal melt. Forge welding is an example of this. Friction stir welding is a special kind of welding that does not use heat. It uses a very powerful motor and a special spinning bit to mix the metals together at the edge. This seems odd because metals are a solid. this is why it takes a lot of force to do and is very hard. The energy for this kind of welding is mechanical energy from the spinning bit."}
{"id": "20670", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20670", "title": "Stalking", "text": "Stalking means following something or somebody secretly. In the animal kingdom, Predators often hunt by stalking, or by combining stalking with ambushing. \nSomeone who likes to watch other people known as a voyeur. When this is continually done to a person it can have a bad effect.\nCriminal stalking.\nStalking in a way that makes someone feel unsafe is a crime in many countries. It is not just one event but an ongoing process that threatens or makes that person feel scared. Someone who does this is called a stalker. The stalker may do this because they want to be involved in that person's life, because they want to have power over that person's life, or for other sexual reasons. The stalker can make that person feel scared. They may feel they do not have the power to stop the stalker. Psychologists say stalking is a way of hurting someone's mind. Sometimes a stalker may go on to hurt that person's body by assaulting, raping or murdering that person.\nCyber-stalking.\nStalking can sometimes be done on the internet. This is called cyberstalking."}
{"id": "20671", "revid": "7876796", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20671", "title": "Bill Cosby", "text": "William Henry Cosby Jr. (; born July 12, 1937) is an American former stand-up comedian, actor, author, producer, musician, and activist. He was also a regular star of movies and television. He was known for creating and starring in \"The Cosby Show\". \nIn 2018, Cosby went to prison. \nHe got out of prison in 2021, because the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania found that the justice system had made a mistake in the process of convicting him.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nCosby was born and raised in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He studied at Temple University.\nCareer.\nHe is the creator of such shows as Filmation's animated \"Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids\", NBC's \"The Cosby Show\" (in which he played a doctor named Heathcliff Huxtable) and Nick at Nite's \"Fatherhood\" (with Blair Underwood).\nOn television, he starred in the 1960s spy spoof \"I Spy\", and has also advertised Jell-o and other products.\nOn the big screen, he appeared in \"Leonard Part 6\" (1987), \"Ghost Dad\" (1990), and \"The Meteor Man\" (1993).\nPersonal life.\nCosby married Camille Hanks Cosby in 1964. Together, they have five children. Cosby lives in suburban Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.\nSince 2016, Cosby has been legally blind, as a result of keratoconus.\nSexual assault charges.\nAs of December 30, 2015, numerous civil lawsuits are active against Cosby, and he faces one felony charge of aggravated indecent assault in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania; a warrant was issued for his arrest. This charge is based on the 2005 allegations of a January 2004 incident. He was released on a $1 million dollar bail later that day.\nCosby's trial started on June 5, 2017. He hired layer Thomas Mesereau.\nHe was found guilty of three counts of assault on April 26, 2018, and was sentenced to 3\u201310 years in prison in late September 2018.\nCosby got out of prison on 30 June 2021, because the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania found that the justice system had made a mistake in the process of convicting him.\nAwards and honors.\nHonorary degrees.\nCosby has been awarded at least 57 honorary degrees since 1985. Several of these honorary degrees have been rescinded due to allegations of sexual assault and/or immoral behavior:"}
{"id": "20673", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20673", "title": "Ham", "text": "Ham is meat that comes from a thigh of a pig. Ham is a kind of pork, which is any meat from a pig. \nHam can be dry-cured or wet-cured. Dry-cured ham is made by rubbing the meat with salt. Then, it is dried and aged. Wet-cured ham is made with brine. Ham is pork. Ham is one of the foods forbidden by kosher rules.\nTypes of dry-cured ham:\nHam is used in SPAM."}
{"id": "20675", "revid": "276159", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20675", "title": "Spam (food)", "text": "Spam is a canned meat food made by the Hormel Foods Corporation. It is made from pork shoulder meat and ham. Spam Lite, a newer kind of Spam, is made with pork and chicken.\nThere have been many ideas about what the word \"Spam\" means. The Hormel Foods Corporation once said that it means \"Shoulder of Pork and Ham\", but in some dictionaries \"Spam\" means \"spiced ham\".\nMembers of staff at the SPAM museum say it stands for Specially Produced American Meat.\nIn 2019, Spam began making advertisements containing the definition \u201cSizzle Pork And Mmmm\u201d.\nSpam was used a lot in World War II, as there wasn't proper meat. Because of that, spam was used as a rationed item."}
{"id": "20676", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20676", "title": "Mushroom", "text": "A mushroom (also called a toadstool) is the part of a fungus that is like a fruit of a plant. Unlike plants, mushrooms do not use sunlight to make energy for themselves. Some mushrooms are edible (safe to be eaten), and are used for cooking in many countries, such as China, Korea and Europe. Other mushrooms, however, are poisonous, and can kill people (or make them very sick) if they are eaten. People who look for mushrooms to eat are called \"mycophagists\", meaning \"mushroom eater\", while The act of looking for mushrooms is simply called \"mushrooming\". Mushrooms helps to make a Healthy Bones and Good for Diabetics. It is available in Different colours and Shapes.\nStructure of mushrooms.\nMost mushrooms have a stem and a cap. The bottom of the cap sometimes has gills to hold spores, and sometimes holds the spores themselves."}
{"id": "20678", "revid": "603851", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20678", "title": "Factorization", "text": "Factorization (also called factorisation and factoring) is taking a composite number apart into numbers that multiply together to get the original number. These smaller numbers are called factors or divisors. 1 is a factor of all numbers.\nPrime factorization is breaking apart a composite numbers into prime numbers that can be multiplied to give the larger number. Note that since 1 is not prime, it is not included in the prime factorization.\nFor example, 12 can be factored as 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03. Since 4 is not a prime number, that is not its prime factorization. 12's prime factorization is in fact 3\u00a0\u00d7\u00a02\u00a0\u00d7\u00a02.\nThe numbers which are obtained from the factorization are usually ordered, for example, starting with the smallest number. For example, 72=2^3*3^2. The factorization of every number is unique. This generalizes to:\nSince finding the numbers to multiply together is very difficult for large numbers, this fact can be used in cryptography.\nPolynomials.\nThis is how one type of polynomial is factored.\nformula_1\nFind two numbers that add up to 9 and can be multiplied to get 20. Here, these numbers are 4 and 5.\nformula_2\nformula_3\nformula_4\nformula_5"}
{"id": "20680", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20680", "title": "Joint", "text": "A joint is the place where two or more bones make contact. They allow movement (except for skull bones) and give mechanical support.\nJoints have cartilage in between them, which help to make the movement flexible. Joints are described structurally and functionally. Structural classification is how the bones connect to each other; function is the degree of movement between the articulating bones. "}
{"id": "20681", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20681", "title": "Articulation", "text": ""}
{"id": "20682", "revid": "7845962", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20682", "title": "Hosni Mubarak", "text": "Muhammad Hosni Said Mubarak (; 4 May 1928 \u2013 25 February 2020), commonly known as Hosni Mubarak (), was an Egyptian politician. He served as President of Egypt from 14 October 1981 to 11 February 2011.\nMubarak became the Vice-President of the Republic of Egypt after moving up the ranks of the Egyptian Air Force. Then he became the President after President Anwar Sadat was assassinated on 6 October 1981. His almost thirty-year presidency made him Egypt's longest-serving ruler since Muhammad Ali Pasha.\nAs President of Egypt, Mubarak is thought to have been one of the most powerful leaders in the region. Under the 1971 Constitution of Egypt, Mubarak exercised strong control over the country and was generally considered a dictator. In 2005, he called an election and easily won it. Many opponents believed Mubarak changed the election results so he could win.\nIn early 2011, during the Arab Spring, there were huge protests against his government. In the end, Mubarak resigned and handed over power to the armed forces. It is hoped that elections later that year for a new government. On 2 June 2012, Mubarak was sentenced to life imprisonment for ordering the shooting of protesters in the revolution that ousted him.\nOn 13 January 2013, Egypt's Court of Cassation overturned Mubarak's sentence and ordered a retrial. On retrial, Mubarak and his sons were convicted on 9 May 2015 of corruption and given prison sentences. Mubarak was detained in a military hospital and his sons were freed 12 October 2015 by a Cairo court. \nHe was acquitted on 2 March 2017 by the Court of Cassation and released on 24 March 2017.\nHe died on 25 February 2020 at a Cairo hospital after having surgery, aged 91."}
{"id": "20683", "revid": "801958", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20683", "title": "Euclid", "text": "Euclid of Alexandria () (about 325 BC\u2013265 BC) was a Greek mathematician who lived in Alexandria, Egypt and worked at the Library of Alexandria. Little is known about this person, but people think he lived there when Ptolemy I was Pharaoh. It is not known where and when he was born.\nThe Elements.\nEuclid collected together all that was known of geometry, which is part of mathematics. His \"Elements\" is the main source of ancient geometry. Textbooks based on Euclid have been used up to the present day. In the book, he starts out from a small set of axioms (that is, a group of things that everyone thinks are true). Euclid then shows the properties of geometric objects and of whole numbers, based on those axioms.\nThe \"Elements\" also includes works on perspective, conic sections, spherical geometry, and possibly quadric surfaces. Apart from geometry, the work also includes number theory. Euclid came up with the idea of \"greatest common divisors\". They were in his \"Elements\". The greatest common divisor of two numbers is the greatest number that can fit evenly in both of the two numbers.\nThe geometrical system described in the \"Elements\" was long known simply as geometry, and was considered to be the only geometry possible. Today that system is referred to as Euclidean geometry to distinguish it from other so-called non-Euclidean geometries which mathematicians developed in the 19th century.\nOther works.\nIn addition to the \"Elements\", at least five works of Euclid have survived to the present day. They follow the same logical structure as \"Elements\", with definitions and proved propositions."}
{"id": "20684", "revid": "95417", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20684", "title": "9 May", "text": ""}
{"id": "20689", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20689", "title": "Guadeloupe", "text": "Guadeloupe is part of France in the Caribbean Sea. It is made up of five islands. The capital is Basse-Terre. \nArawak native Americans first lived on the islands. Most died when Europeans came. Guadeloupe was first governed by the French Company of the American Islands. It was then taken over by England, given to Sweden, and given back to France. \nToday, most of the people in Guadeloupe are Roman Catholic and are of African descent."}
{"id": "20690", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20690", "title": "1770", "text": ""}
{"id": "20691", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20691", "title": "Compact discs", "text": ""}
{"id": "20693", "revid": "5990399", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20693", "title": "Nashville", "text": ""}
{"id": "20694", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20694", "title": "1616", "text": ""}
{"id": "20695", "revid": "934838", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20695", "title": "Lou Reed", "text": "Lewis Allan \"Lou\" Reed (March 2, 1942 \u2013 October 27, 2013) was an American rock musician. He was originally from Long Island, New York and spent most of his life in New York City. He is remembered for being in the Velvet Underground, although he also released solo work. He was friends with artist Andy Warhol.\nEarly life.\nLewis Allan Reed was born on March 2, 1942 in Brooklyn, New York City. He studied at Syracuse University. Reed was raised Jewish.\nCareer.\nReed began his career in 1964. He is perhaps most famous for his songs \"Walk on the Wild Side\" (about transgender woman Candy Darling and other such people Reed had known), \"Perfect Day\" (which was covered by many other artists, including Duran Duran and a version used by the BBC) and \"Heroin\" (an \"love song\" about the drug. Reed's 1989 album \"New York\" drew attention and praise, for its matter-of-fact look at the condition of New York City in the late 1980s.\nAt the height of his popularity as a solo artist, Reed released one of the least \"commercial\" recordings ever; his 1975 experimental album \"Metal Machine Music\". It was an hour of electric guitar feedback, and not what many people thought was music. The album did not hurt his career in the long run, and it reminded people that Reed was a unique musician.\nBecause of his song about heroin, Reed was believed to have been addicted to the drug, but this was not the case. He was a longtime user of amphetamines, marijuana and tobacco, but gradually stopped using any drugs. He began exercising more, and enjoyed Tai Chi.\nIn May 2000, Reed performed before Pope John Paul II at the Great Jubilee Concert in Rome.\nReed was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with The Velvet Underground in 1996 and as a solo artist in 2015.\nPersonal life.\nReed was bisexual. He was married to Betty Reed from 1973 until they divorced in 1978. Then he was married to Sylvia Morales from 1980 until they divorced in 1994. Then he was married to Laurie Anderson, the performance artist and musician, from 2008 until his death in 2013. Reed had no children.\nDeath.\nIn April 2013, Reed had a liver transplant. He died from a liver disease on October 27, 2013 in his home in Long Island, New York. He was 71 years old.\nTributes were paid to Reed on Twitter, including those from Miley Cyrus, Salman Rushdie, Samuel L. Jackson, Lenny Kravitz, Ricky Gervais, Ryan Adams, Elijah Wood, and many others. John Cale, his Velvet Underground bandmate, posted on his Facebook: \"The world has lost a fine songwriter and poet\u2026I've lost my 'school-yard buddy'\"."}
{"id": "20696", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20696", "title": "Bisexual", "text": ""}
{"id": "20698", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20698", "title": "Sexuality", "text": ""}
{"id": "20699", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20699", "title": "Albany", "text": "Albany can be any of the following:"}
{"id": "20700", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20700", "title": "Annapolis", "text": ""}
{"id": "20701", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20701", "title": "Albany, ny", "text": ""}
{"id": "20702", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20702", "title": "Augusta", "text": "Augusta may refer to:"}
{"id": "20703", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20703", "title": "Augusta, me", "text": ""}
{"id": "20704", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20704", "title": "Austin", "text": ""}
{"id": "20705", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20705", "title": "Austin, tx", "text": ""}
{"id": "20706", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20706", "title": "Bay City", "text": ""}
{"id": "20707", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20707", "title": "Bay city, mi", "text": ""}
{"id": "20708", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20708", "title": "Berkeley", "text": "Berkeley could mean:"}
{"id": "20709", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20709", "title": "Bismarck, nd", "text": ""}
{"id": "20710", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20710", "title": "Berkeley, ca", "text": ""}
{"id": "20711", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20711", "title": "Boise", "text": ""}
{"id": "20712", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20712", "title": "Boise, id", "text": ""}
{"id": "20713", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20713", "title": "Carson City", "text": ""}
{"id": "20714", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20714", "title": "Carson city, nv", "text": ""}
{"id": "20715", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20715", "title": "Central Point", "text": ""}
{"id": "20716", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20716", "title": "Central point, or", "text": ""}
{"id": "20717", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20717", "title": "Chantilly", "text": ""}
{"id": "20718", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20718", "title": "Chantilly, va", "text": ""}
{"id": "20719", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20719", "title": "Charleston", "text": "Charleston might mean:"}
{"id": "20720", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20720", "title": "Charleston, wv", "text": ""}
{"id": "20721", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20721", "title": "Chino Hills", "text": ""}
{"id": "20722", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20722", "title": "Chino hills, ca", "text": ""}
{"id": "20723", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20723", "title": "Coden", "text": ""}
{"id": "20725", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20725", "title": "Anthropomorphism", "text": "Anthropomorphism is the addition of human traits to something that is not a human. For example, the non-human might have human feelings, needs, and wants. It is common for people to use anthropomorphism.\nAnthropomorphism is often used in stories and art. The story of the \"Three Little Pigs\" has a wolf and three pigs who talk and act like humans. Disney's Mickey Mouse also talks and acts like a human. An anthropomorphized animal is called a \"furry\".\nThe novel \"The Call of the Wild\" also uses anthropomorphism. The main character is a dog named Buck. Many other characters are dogs and wolves. In the story, the animals think and act more like humans than dogs.\nReasons for anthropomorphism.\nHumans can usually explain why humans do things. Humans are not as good at explaining why non-human things do things. This can lead to people assuming non-human things will do things like humans.\nHumans learn about other humans early in life. They know more about humans than about things that are not humans, and they can remember it better."}
{"id": "20728", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20728", "title": "6 October", "text": ""}
{"id": "20729", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20729", "title": "14 October", "text": ""}
{"id": "20731", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20731", "title": "Apostrophe", "text": "The apostrophe is a punctuation mark used in writing. It is a diacritic (a mark used with letters).\nIn English, it has two jobs:\nExamples.\nIts versus it's.\nThe most common grammatical mistake in written English is to put \"it's\" where \"its\" is correct. \nIts: a possessive adjective and pronoun of the personal pronoun \"it\". \nIt's: a contraction of the verbal phrase \"it is\" or \"it has\".\nThe same applies to \"yours\", \"theirs\" and \"ours\" because these are also possessive adjectives of personal pronouns.\nPossession.\nApostrophes are also used to show something belongs to someone (or something). Again, correct uses can be expanded:\nThe intrusive apostrophe.\nComes in plurals which don't (\"do not\") need it. Do not put an apostrophe in word ending in s, such as a plural. Put an apostrophe, or 's, at the end of the word instead.\nWriting dialogue or titles.\nApostrophes are also used when other words are shortened, as in slang:\nThis is just a version of the abbreviation function.\nPlural.\nTo make a word that doesn't (\"does not\") usually exist as a plural into a plural, an apostrophe is occasionally used. See these examples:"}
{"id": "20732", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20732", "title": "Bronx", "text": ""}
{"id": "20734", "revid": "760123", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20734", "title": "Ryan North", "text": "Ryan M. North (born October 20, 1980) is a Canadian writer. He is the author of the comic strip Dinosaur Comics, as well as Whispered Apologies and several other projects. He is also the programmer of ohnorobot, a web comic search engine. Ryan North is also a member of The Ryans, a group dedicated to being called Ryan and making comics."}
{"id": "20736", "revid": "1055470", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20736", "title": "By-election", "text": "A by-election or bye-election is a type of special election. These elections are held in between general elections. General elections are elections for all members of an elected body. By-elections are elections for just some members. A by-election could be needed if a member dies or resigns while in political office. They are also used if a person is removed from office for some reason, for example if he/she is guilty of a crime or is not qualified to be a member anymore.\nBy-elections in the United States and the Philippines are called \"special elections\". In India, they are called \"bypolls\".\nIn the 1980s, all 12 of the Unionist MPs in the British House of Commons resigned and all of the elections happened on the same day. Although unusual, these were still only by-elections. It is also defined as an election held in a single political constituency to fill a vacancy that has happened during a government's term of office."}
{"id": "20750", "revid": "3609", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20750", "title": "AOL Instant Messenger", "text": ""}
{"id": "20760", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20760", "title": "Belly button", "text": ""}
{"id": "20761", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20761", "title": "Navel", "text": ""}
{"id": "20762", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20762", "title": "Secretary", "text": "A secretary is a person who is employed to help in an office, and help the people in charge of the office do their job. \nBy definition, the main task of a secretary is to keep organized paper and electronic files for the business, school, hospital, or government agency they work for. Other common jobs that secretaries do are answering telephones; typing and writing letters; plan and schedule meetings with guests; and manage the website of their office.\nIn different workplaces, and for different reasons, a secretary may also be called an administrative assistant, receptionist, clerk, or executive assistant.\nIn the past, most secretaries were men. Today, 98% of secretaries are women, according to the US Census. \nIn 1952, several groups, for example the National Secretaries Association, founded Secretary's Day. It is celebrated in the 4th week of April. It has been renamed \"Administrative Professional's Week\" to represent the more challenging roles of secretaries today. \nOther secretaries.\nIn government, secretaries are important people who hold high positions in government. Many secretaries in government are in charge of government agencies. \nMost members of the United States Cabinet are called \"Secretary\" including the United States Secretary of State, who deals with other countries. \nIn the United Kingdom, a Secretary of State is a senior Cabinet Minister in charge of a Government Department. \nIn the USA, United States Secretary Defense is the head of the US Department of Defense. "}
{"id": "20763", "revid": "212981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20763", "title": "Happiness", "text": "Happiness is a feeling of pleasure and positivity. When someone feels good, proud, excited, relieved or satisfied about something, that person is said to be \"happy\". Feeling happy may help people to relax and to smile. \nHappiness is usually thought of as the opposite of sadness. However, it is very possible to feel both at once, often about different things, or sometimes even about the same thing You will feel some excited too when you are happy. Happiness can also be inspired too.\nMany philosophers have said that people in the world go back and forth between times of happiness and sadness, but there is nobody who is always happy or always sad. Happiness sometimes causes people to cry when they laugh because the emotion takes control of them, people should learn how to be happy in life. Happiness was thought of as the key to love in ancient civilizations such as the Incas and the Mayans."}
{"id": "20764", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20764", "title": "Perfect number", "text": "A number is called a perfect number if by adding all the positive divisors of the number (except itself), the result is the number itself.\n6 is the first perfect number. Its divisors (other than the number itself: 6) are 1, 2, and 3 and 1 + 2 + 3 equals 6. Other perfect numbers include 28, 496 and 8128.\nPerfect numbers that are even.\nEuclid discovered that the first four perfect numbers are generated by the formula 2\"n\"-1(2\"n\" - 1):\nEuclid saw that 2\"n\" - 1 is a prime number in these four cases. He then proved that the formula 2\"n\"-1(2\"n\" - 1) gives an even perfect number whenever 2\"n\" - 1 is prime (Euclid, Prop. IX.36).\nAncient mathematicians made many assumptions about perfect numbers based on the four they knew. Most of the assumptions were wrong. One of these assumptions was that since 2, 3, 5, and 7 are precisely the first four primes, the fifth perfect number would be obtained when \"n\" = 11, the fifth prime. However, 211 - 1 = 2047 = 23 \u00d7 89 is not prime and therefore \"n\" = 11 does not give a perfect number. Two other wrong assumptions were:\nThe fifth perfect number (formula_1) has 8 digits. This falsifies the first assumption. For the second assumption, the fifth perfect number indeed ends with a 6. However, the sixth (8 589 869 056) also ends in a 6. It is straightforward to show the last digit of any even perfect number must be 6 or 8.\nIn order for formula_2 to be prime, it is necessary that formula_3 should be prime. Prime numbers of the form 2\"n\" - 1 are known as Mersenne primes, after the seventeenth-century monk Marin Mersenne, who studied number theory and perfect numbers.\nTwo millennia after Euclid, Euler proved that the formula 2\"n\"-1(2\"n\" - 1) will yield all the even perfect numbers. Therefore, every Mersenne prime will yield a distinct even perfect number\u2013there is a concrete one-to-one association between even perfect numbers and Mersenne primes. This result is often referred to as the \"Euclid-Euler Theorem\". Till January 2013, only 48 Mersenne primes are known. This means there are 48 perfect numbers known, the largest being 257,885,160 \u00d7 (257,885,161 - 1) with 34,850,340 digits.\nThe first 42 even perfect numbers are 2\"n\"-1(2\"n\" - 1) for\nThe other 7 known are for \"n\" = 30402457, 32582657, 37156667, 42643801, 43112609, 57885161, 74207281.\nIt is currently not known whether there are others between them.\nIt is still not known if there are infinitely many Mersenne primes and perfect numbers. The search for new Mersenne primes is the goal of the GIMPS distributed computing project.\nSince any even perfect number has the form 2\"n\"-1(2\"n\" - 1), it is a triangular number, and, like all triangular numbers, it is the sum of all natural numbers up to a certain point; in this case: 2\"n\" - 1. Also, any even perfect number except the first one is the sum of the first 2(n-1)/2 odd cubes:\nPerfect numbers that are odd.\nIt is not known whether there are any odd perfect numbers. Various results have been obtained, but none that has helped to locate one or otherwise resolve the question of their existence. Carl Pomerance has presented a heuristic argument which suggests that no odd perfect numbers exist. Also, it has been conjectured that there are no odd Ore's harmonic numbers. If true, this would mean that there are no odd perfect numbers.\nAny odd perfect number \"N\" must satisfy the following conditions:\nProof.\nLet formula_10 be odd perfect number. Since divisor function is multiplicative,\nformula_11.\nformula_12 must be an even not divisible by 4 and all the remaining must be odd.\nformula_13\nforces formula_14.\nMinor results.\nEven perfect numbers have a very precise form; odd perfect numbers are rare, if indeed they do exist. There are a number of results on perfect numbers that are actually quite easy to prove but nevertheless superficially impressive; some of them also come under Richard Guy's Strong Law of Small Numbers:\nRelated concepts.\nThe sum of proper divisors gives various other kinds of numbers. Numbers where the sum is less than the number itself are called deficient, and where it is greater than the number, abundant. These terms, together with \"perfect\" itself, come from Greek numerology. A pair of numbers which are the sum of each other's proper divisors are called amicable, and larger cycles of numbers are called sociable. A positive integer such that every smaller positive integer is a sum of distinct divisors of it is a practical number.\nBy definition, a perfect number is a fixed point of the restricted sum-of-divisors function s(n) = \u03c3(n) \u2212 n, and the aliquot sequence associated with a perfect number is a constant sequence."}
{"id": "20768", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20768", "title": "StarCraft", "text": "StarCraft is a real-time strategy game for the PC. It was created in 1998 by Blizzard Entertainment. \"Starcraft\" is 14 years old and is still played by many people, in many countries around the world. It is very popular in countries like Korea and the United States.\n\"StarCraft\" and its expansion pack \"StarCraft: Brood War\" sold more than 1.5 million copies in 1998, making it the best selling game of the year. In 1998, \"StarCraft\" won an Origins Award for best computer game.\nOn May 19, 2007 Blizzard announced that they are making StarCraft II. Also, they have held some events for South Korean \"StarCraft\" pro-gamers to help them create the game.\nPlot.\nThe story is set in the future, where humans (called \"Terrans\") get stuck in a war between two alien species, the \"Zerg\" and the \"Protoss\". The Zerg look like monsters, and are all controlled by a very powerful Zerg called the \"Overmind\". They fly around the universe and invade planets. The Protoss, who have very advanced technology, look for the planets that the Zerg have taken over. When they find a Zerg planet, they burn it so that the Zerg on that planet cannot spread to others. In the original series human protagonist Jim Raynor and several Protoss allies attack and defeat the Overmind. In \"Starcraft: Brood War\" Jim's ex-partner Sarah Kerrigan uses deceit and trickery to manipulate the Terran and Protoss into helping her take control of the entire Zerg brood, making her the strongest force in the galaxy.\nGameplay.\n\"StarCraft\" players can choose to play as Protoss, Zerg, or Terran races. Each race has different soldiers and buildings. Players can choose to play one-player or multiplayer games. In both, the player must gather resources, and use them to build a base and make soldiers to attack the enemy. The player wins when they destroy all the enemies buildings.\nIn one-player mode, there is the Campaign mode, and Custom mode. In Campaign mode, the player goes through a series of missions, which tell the story. Custom mode lets a player choose what race they want to be, what area they want to play on, and what race they will fight against (all enemies are controlled by the computer).\nDuring a game, the player must use workers to gather minerals and vespene gas. Minerals appear as blue crystals in the ground and vespene gas comes from a geyser that has green smoke coming out of it. To gather vespene gas, the player needs to build a refinery building to be built on the geyser. The player uses minerals and vespene gas they have gathered to construct buildings and create units to fight the enemy. Buildings are structures that are used to create different kinds of units to fight the enemy. In order to create units, players must build special structures or units that provide \"supply\". If the player does not have enough supply, they cannot create more units. Each player has a supply limit of 200 units. When the player has reached 200 units, they can not make more units.\nThere are many different buildings the player can construct. Most of the buildings are used to build units. There are other buildings that are used for research to upgrade units, making them more powerful. Players can also make defensive buildings that are used to defend against attacking enemy units.\nEach race have different types of units. The Protoss have powerful warriors and machinery that cost lots of minerals and gas to build. The Zerg use many fast and low cost units to defeat their enemies. Terran units mix between Protoss and Zerg units. They have strong, but easy to kill units that are powerful when used in formation. No race in \"StarCraft\" is more powerful than another race. Blizzard has released many small updates to the game that keep all the races balanced.\nTo win, players must gather and use resources wisely, and use smart strategies. To become very skilled at the game, players also need to become good at micromanagement and macromanagement. Macromanagement means collecting resources, building new bases, and making units to fight. Micromanagement means moving units so they can use their abilities to protect each other and fight the enemy. Players with better micromanagement will win fights against enemies who are not as good at micromanagement. This makes \"StarCraft\" different from many newer games, because the newer games often do much of the micromanagement without the player having to do it.\nStarCraft in South Korea.\n\"StarCraft\" is especially popular in South Korea. In Korea, \"StarCraft\" sold 4.5 million copies, which is 40% of the total copies sold in the world. Also, there are many pro gamers and pro gaming teams, so \"StarCraft\" games are broadcasted on TV and the internet. The game was sold in Korea by LG Soft. Even though the game wasn't translated into Korean, it was still very popular. This problem was solved in 2005, with a new update to \"StarCraft\"."}
{"id": "20769", "revid": "7364508", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20769", "title": "Acid rain", "text": "One of the tough concerns of today's era is the Acid rain which can have a devastating effect over all organisms living on the Earth. Acid rain is rain that is unusually acidic and highly corrosive in nature. It is rain with high levels of hydrogen ions (low pH). It may be defined as \"rain water having pH less than 5.6\".\nAcid rain can have harmful effects on plants, animals and humans. It is caused when gaseous compounds of ammonium, carbon, nitrogen, and sulphur are released into the atmosphere. The wind carries the gases high into the sky. There the compounds react with the water in the atmosphere and acids are made. In 1852, Robert Angus Smith showed the relationship between acid rain and atmospheric pollution in Manchester. He coined the term \"acid rain\" in 1872.\nCauses.\nAcid rain is caused by acids mixing with air. The largest source of acid is sulphur dioxide. Carbon dioxide and various oxides of nitrogen also make acid in the atmosphere. These chemicals are both natural and artificial.\nThere are various natural causes, such as gases from volcanoes. However, it is thought that air pollution by people now causes most acid rain. People started producing more acidic gases when they started building factories and power stations. These buildings as well as houses and vehicles burn coal or oil that have sulphur in them. This releases gases into the air that produce acid rain. Governments have tried since the 1970s to reduce the amount of sulphur being released into the Earth's atmosphere, and have had good results so far. However, it is expensive to clean the smoke from factories and power stations. In 2001 Great Britain still produced about five million tons of these gases every year; and China produced 18 million tons. The United States produced more than 20 million tons then, which declined to 8.1 million in 2010.\nTrees are destroyed by acid rain. Fish are also killed by acid rain.\nAcid rain can also be caused naturally. For example, acids can be made by nitrogen compounds made by lightning, and volcanic eruptions can release sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere.\nAcid rain has a devastating impact on forests, freshwater and soil. It kills insect and aquatic life-forms as well as causes damage to buildings and having impacts on human health. Due to the corrosive nature of the acids it damages both non-living things as well as living organisms.\nImpact.\nAcid rain has a devastating impact on forests, freshwater and soil. It kills insect and aquatic life-forms as well as causes damage to buildings and having impacts on human health. Due to the corrosive nature of the acids it damages both non-living things as well as living organisms.\nAcid rain poisons rivers and lakes. Fish and other animals cannot live in acid water. It is also bad for buildings as the acid damages calcium carbonate stone. The acid dissolves it. Many buildings and monuments have been damaged by acid rain.\nConsequences.\nAn acid rain involves deposition of aqueous acids, acidic gases and acidic salts.\nAcid deposition has 2 parts: wet and dry.\n\u2713 Wet deposition refers to acidic rain, fog &amp; snow.\n\u2713 Dry deposition refers to acidic gases and particles.\n\u2713 Half of the acidity in the atmosphere falls back to earth through dry deposition.\nAcid rain is a regional air pollution problem. Canada and North Western USA are worst affected. The average pH of rainfall recorded in Toronto in Feb. 1979 was 3.5. In 1989 fog in Los Angeles had a pH as low as 2.2. However till now the record of having the most acidic rain is with US in Wheeling West Virginia where the pH was as low as 1.5."}
{"id": "20770", "revid": "3043", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20770", "title": "Nicknames", "text": ""}
{"id": "20774", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20774", "title": "Charlie Parker", "text": "Charlie Parker (August 29, 1920 in Kansas City, Missouri \u2013 March 12, 1955 in New York City), also known as \"Bird\" or \"Yardbird\", was considered one of the greatest jazz saxophonists, specifically alto saxophonist. Parker was thought to have created bebop.\nParker died in New York City at the age of 34 from cirrhosis, internal bleeding and pneumonia caused by a heart attack."}
{"id": "20775", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20775", "title": "Mount Price", "text": "Mount Price (sometimes Price Mountain) is a volcanic mountain in the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt, in British Columbia, Canada."}
{"id": "20776", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20776", "title": "Bun", "text": "A bun is a type of food made out of bread.\nA bun can be either savoury (like a hot dog) or sweet (like a hot cross bun or a bun with icing and a cherry on top)."}
{"id": "20778", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20778", "title": "Goldfinger (band)", "text": "Goldfinger is an American punk band. It was founded in 1994. They released their self-titled first album in 1996. They were named after the Ian Fleming book and 1964 movie \"Goldfinger\", based on the James Bond franchise.\nTheir line-up is as follows:"}
{"id": "20779", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20779", "title": "Salamanca", "text": "Salamanca is a city in central Spain. It is the capital city of the province with the same name. \nThe city has a very important university started in 1218. It has two cathedrals and a famous Plaza Mayor (Main Square) built in the 18th century.\nFrogs are a mascot of Salamanca. Souvenirs of frogs can be found in almost every shop in the Plaza Mayor.\nThe Battle of Salamanca was an important defeat for France in the Napoleonic Wars.\nOther websites.\nMuseums"}
{"id": "20780", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20780", "title": "1440s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20781", "revid": "1151715", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20781", "title": "Tudor dynasty", "text": "The Tudor dynasty was a series of kings and queens of England. This line of rulers started in 1485 and lasted until 1603.\nThe dynasty started when Henry Tudor defeated Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth Field. This was the final stage of the Wars of the Roses and made him King Henry VII of England. Arthur, Prince of Wales, was the oldest son of Henry VII and Elizabeth of York. He married Catherine of Aragon. She was the daughter of Ferdinand II of Argon and Isabella I of Castle). Arthur died in 1502 and did not become King. \nHenry VIII.\nWhen Henry VII died in 1509, Arthur's brother, Henry VIII married Catherine and became king. \nDuring her marriage to Henry VIII, Catherine had six children. Only one of these children, Mary, survived. When Catherine became too old to have any more children, Henry divorced her. He then married a new wife, Anne Boleyn. Henry and Boleyn also had a daughter, Elizabeth. Anne Boleyn was executed in 1536. \nShortly after, Henry VIII married Jane Seymour of England. She had one son, Edward VI of England, who would later become king himself at the age of 9. Jane died in 1537. Her death was caused by medical problems caused by Edward's birth. \nHenry married three other wives before his death in 1547. Edward, his only living son, became King after Henry died.\nIn 1553, Edward became ill. He created the \"Device for Succession.\". He said that his cousin, Lady Jane Grey, would be Queen after he died. Lady Jane was only queen for nine days. \nHenry's daughter, Mary I of England, was the next ruler of the Tudor dynasty. Mary was a strong believer in Catholicism. As Queen, Mary did many things against hundreds of Protestants. Because of all the executions while she was Queen, she was given the nickname \"Bloody Mary\", which is a name for a modern cocktail today.\nAfter Mary's death in 1558, her half-sister Elizabeth I of England became queen. Unlike Mary, Elizabeth was a Protestant. Elizabeth never married or had children. Because she never married, Elizabeth is often called the \"Virgin Queen\".\nThe dynasty ended when Elizabeth died. She had not named a person to be ruler after her death. When she died, James I became King of England. He was the son of Elizabeth's cousin, Mary Stuart. This started the Stuart dynasty.\nReligion in England.\nDuring the Tudor period, there were many changes in religion. Henry VIII was a Catholic. When the Pope said he could not divorce Catherine, Henry left Catholicism and named himself as head of the Church. The Church of England was now Protestant. Edward VI was raised a Protestant. He closed all Catholic churches. Mary I was a strong Catholic and heavily influenced by her Spanish mother Catherine of Aragon. She closed the Protestant churches and burnt about 300 people for being Protestant. Those people were later called martyrs. Elizabeth was Protestant. When she became queen, the Anglican Church was started.\nRulers of the Tudor dynasty.\nThis is a list of the rulers of the Tudor dynasty:"}
{"id": "20782", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20782", "title": "Elizabeth Blackwell", "text": "Elizabeth Blackwell (3 February 1821-1910) was the first female doctor in the United States and in Europe\nShe was born in Bristol, England, on 3 February 1821. When she was young, her family moved to America. At first, she was a teacher. She became a doctor in 1849. She founded her own hospital in New York. In 1874 she started a medical school for women in London with Sophie Jex-Blake and promoted women's rights.\nShe never married and opposed slavery.\nIn 2013 the University of Bristol launched the Elizabeth Blackwell Institute for Health Research.\nElizabeth Blackwell lost sight in one eye in 1851.\nBlackwell wrote many books including Medicine as a Profession for Women and Address on the Medical Education for women. "}
{"id": "20784", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20784", "title": "Doom", "text": "Doom is a first-person shooter video game made by id Software in 1993. It is one of the first games to use three-dimensional levels. The game is about killing demons and zombies in order to stop an invasion. \"Doom\" has traps, including crushing ceilings, radiation pools, and exploding barrels, that can kill the player. \"Doom\" was also the first game with multiplayer deathmatch. This means you can fight with other players instead of the demons and zombies. The game was made with a computer language called C using some new techniques created by John Carmack.\nIt has five sequels: \"Doom 2\" that came out in 1994, \"Final Doom\" that came out in 1996, \"Doom 3\" that came out in 2004, Doom (2016), and Doom Eternal.\n\"Doom\" is split into three basic components, the engine, the Iwad file, and the optional Pwad file. The engine contains the code needed to run the game on a computer. The Iwad file contains the default levels, sounds, pictures, and other components. Pwad files contain custom levels. The source code to the \"Doom\" engine was released in 1997 and can be downloaded for free. The full 3-episode and 4-episode Iwad files have not been released for free and must still be purchased.\n\"Doom\" is a shareware game of three episodes, each having eight standard levels and one secret level. The secret level in each episode is accessed by finding a secret exit in one of the normal levels. The episodes are \"Knee-Deep In The Dead\", \"The Shores Of Hell\" and \"Inferno\". In the shareware version the only episode that can be played is \"Knee-Deep In The Dead\". The expansion pack of \"Doom\" is \"Ultimate Doom\", which has the fourth episode, \"Thy Flesh Consumed\".\nIn \"Doom\", the player can carry and use many different weapons. Each have their own special features and strengths. They are your Fists, the Pistol, Shotgun, Chaingun, Rocket Launcher, Plasma Gun, BFG-9000, and Chainsaw. The player gets new weapons by finding them in the level. Most weapons can be found in more than one level. Some weapons share ammo. For example, both the Pistol and Chaingun use bullets, and the Plasma Gun and BFG both use energy cells. The player must be careful not to waste ammo because if he or she does, there may be more than one weapon that cannot be used. The Fists and Chainsaw do not have ammo limits, so the player can use them as long as they want.\n\"Doom\" was also made for the SNES, Sega 32X, PlayStation, Sega Saturn, 3DO, Atari Jaguar, and Game Boy Advance. It can also be downloaded online for the PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch. "}
{"id": "20785", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20785", "title": "The Jam", "text": "The Jam was an English rock band formed in Woking, Surrey in 1972. The members were Paul Weller (guitar, vocals), Bruce Foxton (bass guitar, vocals), and Rick Buckler (drums). Having come out of from the short Punk movement they went on to become one of the UK's top bands. They had four number one hits which were Going Underground, Start!, Town Called Malice and Beat Surrender.\nThe Jam disbanded in 1982. Lead singer Paul Weller went on to have hits with The Style Council during the remainder of the 1980s. During the 1990s he had a successful solo career."}
{"id": "20788", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20788", "title": "Second Indochina War", "text": ""}
{"id": "20792", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20792", "title": "Dutch Revolt", "text": ""}
{"id": "20794", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20794", "title": "Alchemy", "text": "Alchemy is the very old study and philosophy of how to change basic substances (such as metals) into other substances. It also studied how substances (and how they are changed into other substances) were related to magic and astrology. People who studied alchemy were called \"alchemists\". Some things alchemists tried to do were change lead or mercury into gold, make the philosopher's stone, and make the \"elixir of life,\" which they thought could cure (make better) any disease and make someone young again.\nAlchemists believed that substances, mind, philosophies, religion, magic and astrology were related to each other. They tried to find connections between them. They tried to understand one by understanding the other. Some alchemists used metals (like gold or silver) to represent spiritual or occult ideas. People in many different countries studied alchemy.\nIn the 1600s and 1700s, people started to study only the properties of substances without trying to relate them to secret, old knowledge. They did experiments and wrote down what they discovered so other people could learn from them. One of the important people who did these experiments was Robert Boyle. People called the new study of substances chemistry.\nScientists have since discovered how to change one kind of element (the simplest kind of chemical substance) into another. In 1980, an American scientist named Glenn Seaborg discovered how to change a very tiny amount of bismuth into gold with a nuclear reactor. Making gold this way is much more difficult and expensive (costs a lot of money) than mining or recycling it."}
{"id": "20795", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20795", "title": "First person shooter", "text": ""}
{"id": "20797", "revid": "7766416", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20797", "title": "Goldfinger (movie)", "text": "Goldfinger is a 1964 spy movie based on the seventh James Bond book written by Ian Fleming. \"Goldfinger\" is the third James Bond movie in the series. It is also third to star Sean Connery as the British Secret Service agent James Bond. Shirley Bassey sings the title song of the movie.\nPlot.\nIn this movie, the main bad guy is named Auric Goldfinger, and he likes gold a lot. In the movie, James Bond tries to find out what Goldfinger's bad plan is, and in the end James Bond wins and stops Goldfinger. His plan is to blow up Fort Knox so that the price of gold will go up. Goldfinger has a sidekick called Oddjob who throws his metal hat at people.\nIt is noted for the character with the unusual name \"Pussy Galore\", played in the movie by Honor Blackman."}
{"id": "20799", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20799", "title": "Scar", "text": "A scar is the natural result of a healing process in the human body. When the dermis is hurt by a wound, the wounded tissue will be replaced by scar tissue. Scar tissue is not identical to the tissue it replaces. A scar will look different (and have different characteristics) than the surrounding tissue.\nScar tissue is composed of the same protein (collagen) as the tissue that it replaces, but the fiber composition of the protein is different; instead of a random basketweave formation of the collagen fibers found in normal tissue, in fibrosis the collagen cross-links and forms a pronounced alignment in a single direction. This collagen scar tissue alignment is usually of inferior functional quality to the normal collagen randomised alignment. For example, scars in the skin are less resistant to ultraviolet radiation, and sweat glands and hair follicles do not grow back within scar tissues. A myocardial infarction, commonly known as a heart attack, causes scar formation in the heart muscle, which leads to loss of muscular power and possibly heart failure. However, there are some tissues (e.g. bone) that can heal without any structural or functional deterioration."}
{"id": "20800", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20800", "title": "Warcraft", "text": "Warcraft is a series of computer games made by Blizzard Entertainment. The games in this series are real-time strategy games, where players play as their characters and gain experience to level up.\nSeries.\nThe different games from the series are ', ' (with an expansion pack) and \"Warcraft 3\" and its expansion pack, \"The Frozen Throne\". The most successful game of the series is \"The Frozen Throne\" expansion pack, which sold more than 12 million copies. The MMORPG \"World of Warcraft\" is based on these games. Blizzard Entertainment also created \"World of Warcraft\", which was published by Vivendi Games."}
{"id": "20802", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20802", "title": "Prostitute", "text": ""}
{"id": "20807", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20807", "title": "Vegitarian", "text": ""}
{"id": "20808", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20808", "title": "Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung", "text": "DIN Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung e.V. (DIN German Institute for Standardization) is the German national organization for standardization. \nIt publishes on average 2,000 standards per year in almost all fields of technology and increasingly in non-technical fields (e.g. services)."}
{"id": "20809", "revid": "965047", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20809", "title": "Paper size", "text": "Paper comes in different sizes. There are names for the different sizes of paper. In different parts of the world, different sizes and names are used.\nThere are also envelope sizes made to fit different kinds of paper.\nInternational sizes.\nIn most of the world an international system of paper sizes is used. The normal size of paper is called A4. It is measured in metric units. It is 210 millimetres wide and 297 millimetres long. This is about the size of US letter, but it is a little narrower, and a little longer. The Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung chose this standard in 1922 and other countries soon followed. \nThe other common size of paper in Europe is called B5. It is 176 millimetres wide by 250 millimetres long. This is about the same as executive size in the United States. It is sometimes used for writing personal letters to people.\nThere are also many other paper sizes used for writing notes, for big posters, for books, and for other things.\nIn the international paper size system, the sizes are based on mathematical formulas. A0 is the biggest at 1 square metre. A1 is half as big as A0. A2 is half as big as A1, and so on. The sizes with \"B\" and \"C\" in their name are in between the \"A\" sizes.\nSizes in United States and Canada.\nIn the United States and Canada the normal size of paper is called letter size, or sometimes US letter. It is inches wide and 11 inches long (216 \u00d7 279\u00a0mm).\nThe other common size of paper in the US is called legal, or sometimes US legal. It is also inches wide, but it is 14 inches long. It is similar to the size called foolscap in Britain.\nAnother size is called executive. It is inches wide by inches long. It is not very common. It is sometimes used for writing personal letters to people.\nThere is also a size called tabloid. It is 11 inches wide, and 17 inches long. That is the same size as two pieces of letter size put next to each other.\nThere are also many other paper sizes used for writing notes, for big posters, for books, and for other things.\nPaper sizes and computer printers.\nMost printers used with computers are designed to fit US letter and A4, and smaller paper sizes. Sometimes they can fit US legal also. For larger paper sizes, printers at professional printing businesses may be needed.\nDetails.\nBelow are charts showing all the different sizes of paper that are usually made, listed in increasing order of size. Dimensions are shown width first, then length.\nIf a company wants to make something with a different size of paper than these, they have to have it specially cut for them."}
{"id": "20810", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20810", "title": "Deusches Institut f\u00fcr Normung", "text": ""}
{"id": "20812", "revid": "2131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20812", "title": "Photo", "text": ""}
{"id": "20813", "revid": "17988", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20813", "title": "Envelope", "text": "An envelope is a form of packing. Envelopes are used for sending letters or documents using regular postal mail. Envelopes are usually made of paper or hardened paper.\nAn envelope may be small enough to make you need to fold the paper going into it, or it can be as large as the paper so that you do not need to fold it. A large envelope is called a \"manila envelope\", usually colored a color in between yellow and orange, and is used to send several pages of papers when a regular envelope would be too small. Another reason a manila envelope would be used would be to send important papers (e.g. birth certificates) that are better left unfolded.\nTo pay to send the mail, a stamp is usually attached to the envelope."}
{"id": "20815", "revid": "1122328", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20815", "title": "Francis Hutcheson", "text": "Francis Hutcheson (born August 8, 1694, died August 8, 1746) was an Irish philosopher and one of the founding fathers of the Scottish Enlightenment."}
{"id": "20817", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20817", "title": "Yasser Arafat", "text": "Yasser Arafat (24 August 1929 \u2013 11 November 2004) is best known as the first leader of the Palestinian people. He was Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) from 1969 to 2004. In 1993 he also became president of the Palestinian National Authority (PNA).\nArafat was born in Jerusalem, Gaza or Cairo. He studied civil engineering at Cairo University. He worked as an engineer in Kuwait.\nIn 1994, Yasser Arafat was one of the three recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize. The others were Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres. They got the prize for their peace efforts in the Middle East.\nThe views of him are somewhat divided. Some people see him as a hero, who fought for the cause of the Palestinian people. Others see him as a terrorist, who promoted the use of violence to reach his goals. Still others think he was a charismatic leader, but he made too many concessions to the Israeli government. \nYasser died in Paris from a cerebral hemorrhage. The next day he was buried at his compound in due to a hasty funeral in Ramallah on November 12, he was reburied on November 13, around 3:30 am. He was buried in a special casket, with the hope of being reburied in Jerusalem one day when an independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital will be established."}
{"id": "20818", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20818", "title": "Antidote", "text": "An antidote is a chemical or medicine that will reverse the effects of some poisons. An antidote will make some or all of the effects of the poison go away.\nEach antidote only works for certain poisons.\nNot every poison has an antidote. For example, the poison aconitine has no known antidote. Aconitine is a very poisonous toxin that comes from the \"Aconitum\" plant. If enough of the poison enters a person's body, the person often dies.\nExamples of antidotes.\nActivated charcoal.\nActivated charcoal can be used as an antidote for many poisons, but only poisons that were swallowed. For example, activated charcoal can be used for some drug overdoses, and for some poisonings. The charcoal attaches to the poison and keeps it from being taken into the bloodstream through the stomach.\nActivated charcoal will not work for every kind of poison. For example, it will not work for alcohol, strong acids, and products made of petroleum (like paint thinner and fuel oil).\nAntivenoms.\nAntivenoms will fight the poisonous effects of bites from venomous animals (animals that make venom), like some snakes and spiders.\nTo create some antivenoms, a little bit of venom is injected into an animal, like a horse. That animal's immune system will create antibodies which signal other cells in the immune system to destroy the venom. Then, those antibodies can be taken out of the animal's blood to make an antivenom. Then, when that antivenom is given to a person who has been poisoned by that venom, the person's immune system will already \"know\" to kill the venom.\nAtropine.\nSometimes, antidotes are poisons themselves. For example, atropine, which is found in deadly nightshade, is very poisonous. However, because of the way it reacts with the body, atropine is used as an antidote against some insecticides and certain kinds of nerve gas. Atropine is carried on many ambulances because it has other uses. For example, it can help restart a heart that is not beating.\nThere is a product called DuoDote that combines atropine with a medicine called pralidoxime chloride (also called 2-PAM). Both medicines are antidotes against some insecticides and nerve gases. DuoDote is given by injection (through a needle into the thigh muscle). It comes in an auto-injector, which looks like a large pen. When its safety cap is taken off and the auto-injector is pushed against the thigh, it will automatically send the needle into the thigh and deliver the medicines. DuoDote is not carried on many ambulances, but some special teams that specialize in treating poisons carry them.\nCyanide antidotes.\nThere are a few different antidotes to cyanide. Some of them need to be given together in order to work.\nOften, the first thing that medical professionals will do for cyanide poisoning is to give amyl nitrate or sodium nitrate. These work by making the cyanide attach (stick) to a chemical called methemoglobulin. When it is stuck to methemoglobulin, cyanide is not as dangerous. However, methemoglobulin will only stick to cyanide for a while. Eventually, it will not stick any more. This is why another medicine is needed.\nThat medicine is called sodium thiosulfate. This medicine sticks to cyanide, and never un-sticks. It helps make cyanide into another chemical that is not poisonous. This new chemical can easily be removed from the body by the kidneys, through urination.\nSome ambulances carry cyanide antidote kits for firefighters who have breathed in too much smoke. (Smoke from a fire has cyanide in it.) These antidote kits are auto-injectors like the DuoDote.\nEthanol.\nEthanol - drinking alcohol - can actually be used as an antidote. It works for people who have been poisoned by drinking ethylene glycol. Ethylene glycol is used in antifreeze. Because ethylene glycol tastes very sweet, children and animals sometimes drink a lot of it without realizing that it is poison.\nEthanol also works as an antidote for methanol poisoning. Methanol is sometimes called \"wood alcohol.\" It is also used in antifreeze, fuel, and solvents. People can get methanol poisoning accidentally by getting methanol on their skin or breathing it in. Methanol is also poisonous if it is drunk.\nEthanol works as an antidote for ethylene glycol and methanol by sticking to those poisons. Once the ethanol is stuck onto the poisons, the kidneys urinate out the poisons.\nA medicine called fomepizole is also an antidote for ethylene glycol and methanol poisoning. It works the same way as ethanol.\nNaloxone (Narcan).\nNaloxone is an antidote for overdoses on opiates, like heroin, oxycodone (OxyContin), and other prescribed painkillers. The most common brand name for the naloxone antidote is Narcan.\nOpiates cause changes in the body by sticking to special opiate receptors (like landing spots) in the brain. If they are not attached to these receptors, they cannot cause any changes in the body. Naloxone works by pushing the opiates off their landing spots. Narcan sticks to those landing spots instead and keeps opiates from attaching to them.\nNaloxone should not be confused with naltrexone, which is a different medicine.\nOxygen.\n100% (pure) oxygen is an antidote for carbon monoxide poisoning. When pure oxygen is not enough, hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) can also be used.\nHBOT is done in a special tube or room that can handle high pressures (called a hyperbaric chamber). 100% pure oxygen is sent into the room for the patient to breathe. However, the air pressure is increased to three times more than the normal air pressure. This helps the lungs get more oxygen than they could if the patient were breathing at normal air pressure. It also makes it easier for the blood to carry more oxygen to the entire body.\nVitamin K.\nVitamin K is an antidote for warfarin (Coumadin) poisoning. Warfarin is a medicine which makes the blood thinner. It is used to prevent blood clots. However, if a person is given too much warfarin, their blood can get too thin. When the blood is too thin, it cannot clot. This can cause serious bleeding problems. \nThe blood needs vitamin K to be able to clot. When a person has warfarin poisoning, giving them vitamin K can make their blood able to clot again.\nIt takes vitamin K four to six hours to reverse warfarin poisoning. Because of this, if a person with warfarin poisoning is bleeding, doctors may also give fresh frozen plasma. This will work more quickly to make the blood less thin."}
{"id": "20821", "revid": "1000261", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20821", "title": "Yitzhak Rabin", "text": "Yitzhak Rabin (March 1, 1922 \u2013 November 4, 1995) was an Israeli politician and general. He was born in Jerusalem. He was the fifth Prime Minister of Israel from 1974 until 1977 and again from 1992 until his assassination in 1995 by Yigal Amir, a right-wing extremist who had strongly opposed Rabin's signing of the Oslo Accords and to peace with Palestine. He was the first local-born Prime Minister of Israel, the only Israeli Prime Minister to be killed and the second to die in office (following Levi Eshkol).\nYitzhak Rabin was one of the three recipients of the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize. The others were Yasser Arafat and Shimon Peres. All three got the prizes for trying to make peace in the Middle East.\nHe died in Tel Aviv in 1995 after being assassinated. He was buried Helkat Gdolei Ha'uma in Mount Herzl in Jerusalem."}
{"id": "20823", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20823", "title": "General (disambiguation)", "text": "General is a word with many meanings:"}
{"id": "20824", "revid": "62069", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20824", "title": "Activist", "text": ""}
{"id": "20825", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20825", "title": "Pleasure", "text": "Pleasure is an emotion. It is the opposite of pain. Humans and many other mammals feel pleasure. People feel pleasure when they do something that is fun or that feels good. \nPleasure in neuroscience.\nPleasure is studied in neuroscience. Neuroscientists have mapped pleasure \"hotspots\" in the brain. Pleasure is important for a person's mental health and well-being. The loss of pleasure is common in people with mental illnesses like depression, schizophrenia, and addiction.\nPleasure in psychology.\nPleasure is studied in positive psychology. How much pleasure someone feels changes from person to person. Pleasure depends how special something is. There is no rule that says what pleasure is for every person. \nSigmund Freud wrote about the \"pleasure principle\" in the 1920 essay \"Beyond the Pleasure Principle\". According to Freud, the pleasure principle is what drives people to do things that give them a feeling of immediate gratification.\nPleasure in philosophy.\nThe ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus said that people feel the most pleasure possible when they have no suffering.\nHedonism is another philosophy that is focused on pleasure. It says that pleasure is good. In Hedonism, people focus on pleasure and avoid pain. \nUtilitarianism is a philosophy that focuses on pleasure. It says that morality requires that people do what has the most utility for the most people. "}
{"id": "20826", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20826", "title": "After", "text": "After might mean\""}
{"id": "20835", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20835", "title": "Kettle", "text": "A kettle is a type of pot that is used in a kitchen. It is used to make water hot or to boil water. It comes from the Latin word \"catillus\" (\"deep pan or dish for cooking\").\nIn the past, kettles were made of metal bins like copper. Kettles were put on a rack or a hook above the fire to become hot. Now, metal kettles are put on the stove or rangetop. Sometimes they are made of ceramic or clay. \nNow, some people have electric kettles. These kettles plug into the wall and use electricity to generate heat. They are usually plastic or metal. They heat water faster than kettles on a stove. Kettles are often used to make tea. \nThey are more common in the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth than other places like the United States."}
{"id": "20836", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20836", "title": "Emperor Wilhelm II", "text": ""}
{"id": "20837", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20837", "title": "Nerve agent", "text": "Nerve gas or nerve agent is the name of a family of chemical poisons. Usually people call them \"nerve agents\" (they are not always gases). They work by changing the way the nerves work in the human body. They stop messages from the brain from getting sent to the muscles and organs.\nNerve agents are organic chemicals that have phosphorus in them (organophosphates). Many organophosphates are pesticides, and have the same effects as nerve agents if people are exposed to them. However, these pesticides are not used against people as weapons like nerve agents are.\nSince they are chemical weapons, nerve agents are classified as weapons of mass destruction by the United Nations according to UN Resolution 687. Since 1993, making or stockpiling them has been against international law.\nNerve agents have long-lasting effects. People who survive nerve agent poisoning almost always have chronic damage to the brain and nerves. This damage can also cause mental health problems.\nHow they work.\nNerve agents work by blocking communication between the brain and the body. Usually, a neurotransmitter (a chemical messenger) called acetylcholine gives the signal for the muscles to tighten up. It also keeps them from relaxing. However, when it is time for the muscles to relax, an enzyme called acetylcholinesterase destroys acetylcholine, and another neurotransmitter tells the muscles to relax.\nNerve agents work by blocking acetyl-cholinesterase. Too much acetylcholine builds up, because it is not getting destroyed by acetylcholinesterase. The muscles keep getting more and more signals to tighten up. Basically, the brain loses control over the body's muscles. It cannot make the muscles relax. This leads to many of the unique signs and symptoms of nerve agent poisoning.\nAcetylcholine also signals the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) to kick in. Usually, the PNS balances out with the sympathetic nervous system to maintain homeostasis. However, when there is too much acetylcholine, the two systems cannot balance, and the sympathetic nervous system does not work correctly.\nSymptoms.\nNerve agent poisoning causes a very unique group of signs and symptoms. Some medical providers use the acronym \"SLUDGE\" to remember them:\n&lt;br&gt;\nSome medical professionals use a different version of this acronym: \"SLUDGE and the Killer B's.\" \"The Killer B's\" are three life-threatening symptoms:\nAs the person gets worse, they will have muscle twitches, then start having seizures and go into status epilepticus. People can die because their brain cannot control their breathing muscles, and they stop breathing.\nCommonly known nerve agents.\n\"G series\" nerve gases.\nThese nerve gases are called \"G series\" because they were first created by German scientists. They were all discovered and made before or during World War II.\n\"V series\" nerve gases.\nNobody agrees on why these nerve gases are called \"V series.\" Different people say the V stands for \"Victory,\" \"Venomous\" (poisonous), or \"Viscous\" (thick liquid).\nInternational law.\nThere have been two major international laws that relate to nerve agents:"}
{"id": "20838", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20838", "title": "Nerve gas", "text": ""}
{"id": "20839", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20839", "title": "Herbicide", "text": "A herbicide is a poison that kills plants. There are many kinds of herbicides, from weedkillers for gardens to Agent Orange which was used to destroy forests in the Vietnam War."}
{"id": "20844", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20844", "title": "Hugh Hefner", "text": "Hugh Marston Hefner (April 9, 1926 \u2013 September 27, 2017) was the founder of \"Playboy Magazine\" and its Editor-in-Chief.\nBirth and education.\nHefner was born into a Methodist family, to Glenn Hefner, an accountant, and Grace (Swanson) Hefner, a teacher, on April 9, 1926 in Chicago, Illinois. He was raised in Woodlawn, Chicago. Hefner served in the US Army (1944 - 1946). He attended the Art Institute of Chicago (1946), the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, earning a BA in Psychology (1949), and Northwestern University, 1949.\nMarriages and children.\nHefner married Mildred Williams (June 25, 1949 - 1959, divorced); Kimberley Conrad (July 1, 1989 - September 2009, divorced); and Crystal Harris (December 31, 2012 - 2017, his death).\nHefner has several children. With Mildred, he has David Paul (August 30, 1955) and Christie Ann (November 8, 1952). With Kimberley, he has Cooper Bradford (September 4, 1991) and Marston Glenn (April 9, 1990).\nHefner was a distant relative of George W. Bush and John Kerry.\nCareer.\nHefner owned a multi-million mansion called the Playboy Mansion. He was also the executive producer of Roman Polanski's 1971 movie version of Macbeth. Hefner also appeared in cameos of himself in some movies.\nWhen nude photographs of Jayne Mansfield on the set of \"Promises! Promises!\" were published in the June 1963 issue of \"Playboy\", Hefner was brought into Chicago city court on obscenity charges.\nIn 2013, Hefner announced that his youngest son, Cooper, would succeed him and eventually help run the Playboy Empire.\nHefner supported legalizing same-sex marriage. He said that a fight for gay marriage is \"a fight for all our rights. Without it, we will turn back the sexual revolution and return to an earlier, puritanical time.\"\nHefner owned a burial plot next to Marilyn Monroe's grave in Los Angeles.\nDeath.\nHefner died at his home in Beverly Hills, California on September 27, 2017 after suffering from a cardiac arrest and sepsis caused by respiratory failure and an e. coli infection the age of 91."}
{"id": "20846", "revid": "7441332", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20846", "title": "Urination", "text": "Urination (peeing) is how animals and humans remove urine from their bodies. Urine is the scientific term for \"pee\", the liquid bodily waste filtered out of the bloodstream by kidneys and from the liquids that a person drinks. The bladder temporarily holds the waste fluid. "}
{"id": "20847", "revid": "177123", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20847", "title": "Mainframe", "text": ""}
{"id": "20850", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20850", "title": "Nyctalopia", "text": "Nyctalopia (Greek for Night blindness) is a disease of the human eyes.The eyes of people who are night-blind cannot adapt to situations where there is relatively little light; as a result, they have trouble seeing in such situations. \nThere are a number of conditions that can cause this; most commonly:"}
{"id": "20852", "revid": "212981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20852", "title": "Martinique", "text": "Martinique is an island in the Caribbean Sea. It has an area of 1,128\u00a0km\u00b2. Nearly 400,000 people live there.\nMartinique was known by indigenous peoples of the Caribbean as Madiana or Madinina. It was colonized by the French in the 17th century, and they introduced racist slavery there as they spread it all around the world. France still claims to own the island today, even though there has been an independence movement.\nThe capital city is Fort-de-France. Other towns include Sainte-Anne and St. Pierre (which was destroyed by a volcano named Mont Pel\u00e9e in 1902 and killed 30,000 people).\nMartinique is well known for its zouk music. Artists such as Kassav' have made it famous over the years. Frantz Fanon, an important anti-colonial revolutionary, was born there.\nThe ethnic makeup of the country is: 90% African and Mixed African with anything from Chinese, East Indian or White. and 10% White, Amerindian, Chinese and East Indian."}
{"id": "20854", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20854", "title": "PHP", "text": "PHP (PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor) is a scripting language that helps people make web pages more interactive by allowing them to do more intelligent, complex things. PHP code is run on the web server.\nA website programmed with PHP can have pages that are password protected. A website with no programming cannot do this without other complex things. Standard PHP file extensions are: .php .php3 or .phtml, but a web server can be set up to use any extension.\nIts structure was influenced by many languages like C, Perl, Java, C++, and even Python. It is considered to be free software by the Free Software Foundation.\nHistory.\nPHP was first created by Rasmus Lerdorf in 1995. It is now developed and improved by a large team of people. Its name at first stood for Personal Home Page, but it was later changed to PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor; using its old acronym in the new name.\nExample.\nAn example Hello World program:\n&lt;?php\necho \"Hello, World!\";\nIt is common to put PHP code inside a HTML document, for example:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;\n&lt;html&gt;\n &lt;head&gt;\n &lt;title&gt;Hello World&lt;/title&gt;\n &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;?= '&lt;p&gt;Hello World&lt;/p&gt;'; ?&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;"}
{"id": "20858", "revid": "7890712", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20858", "title": "Hello world program", "text": "A Hello world program is usually a program made by computer programmers that are new to a programming languages, or to test if the compiler for this language is working correctly. It will simply put the text Hello, World! on the screen. \nOne way to do the Hello World program is shown below, in the C programming language.\nint main(int argc, char* argv[])\n printf(\"Hello World\");\n return 0;\nOn Python programming language:\nprint(\"Hello World\")\nOn Pascal programming language\nprogram helloworld;\nbegin\n WriteLn('Hello World');\nend.\nOn Lua programming language:\nprint(\"Hello World\")\nOn C++ programming language:\nint main()\n std::cout \u00ab \u201cHello World\u201d \u00ab std::endl;\n return 0;"}
{"id": "20861", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20861", "title": "1720s", "text": ""}
{"id": "20864", "revid": "7797299", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20864", "title": "2030s", "text": "The 2030s (pronounced \"twenty-thirties\") will begin on January 1, 2030 and will end on December 31, 2039.\nThe decade as a whole.\nThis decade will be called \"the twenty-thirties\". The Roman number will be MMXXX."}
{"id": "20865", "revid": "87890", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20865", "title": "Programming", "text": ""}
{"id": "20866", "revid": "27715", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20866", "title": "Cycling", "text": ""}
{"id": "20867", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20867", "title": "DarkBASIC", "text": "DarkBASIC is a programming language that is very easy to create games in so people do not need to worry about DirectX. People now use the more powerful DarkBASIC Professional.\nHello World in DarkBASIC.\n print \"Hello, World!\""}
{"id": "20869", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20869", "title": "Starcraft", "text": ""}
{"id": "20870", "revid": "6487810", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20870", "title": "XML", "text": "The Extensible Markup Language (short XML) is a markup language like HTML but is extensible. It's created by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). XML defines rules for the construction of a document. XML adds context to the information in a document. It does not say how this should be displayed.\nSome programs get information out of an XML-document. To do that, they need an API. There are many APIs for XML.\nYou can write a description of an XML document in a way that is useful for programmers. There are several languages for this; the best known is called DTD.\nSyntax.\nXML uses less than (&lt;) and greater than (&gt;) to show tags. For example, a paragraph in HTML would be codice_1.\nA closing tag is a tag used to enclose the value of the tag. The tag has a slash (/) before its name. For example, codice_2\nA tag which is empty can be represented as an opening tag but with a slash before the codice_3. For example, codice_4\nLanguages.\nThe following languages are based on XML.\nOther.\nThere are a lot more languages that use XML. A couple of them are:"}
{"id": "20871", "revid": "1104605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20871", "title": "JavaScript", "text": "JavaScript is a high-level programming language that follows the ECMAScript standard. It was originally designed as a scripting language for websites but became widely adopted as a general-purpose programming language, and is currently the most popular programming language in use. JavaScript is usually found running in a web browser as interactive or automated content, ranging from popup messages and live clocks to large web applications. JavaScript is also commonly used in server-side programming through platforms like Node.js, or \"embedded\" in non-JavaScript applications where the base programming language lacks the high-level functionality that JavaScript offers.\nDespite the similarities in name and syntax, JavaScript is not related to the programming language Java. Though the names of both languages are trademarks of Oracle Corporation, the two languages follow different design principles, and are actively developed by unrelated organizations.\nUse.\nJavaScript is typically inserted into HTML when used on the web, either directly in the file in an HTML tag, or linked to a separate file containing the script.\nJavaScript, as a full featured scripting language, can be used to provide functionality to a website. Examples include:\nFrameworks.\nA majority of websites use what is known as a framework. Frameworks may allow programming to be easier as more predefined procedures are defined within it. Such a library is jQuery.\nBeyond web browsers.\nJavaScript is also used outside of web browsers. As a scripting language, JavaScript can be used to define the behaviour of applications such as extensions in GNOME Shell.\nIn addition, there are runtime environments for running JavaScript as a server side programming language. Such an environment is Node.js.\nElectron is a framework which allows graphical applications to be made with web technologies, by running on the Chromium browser and Node.js.\nSyntax.\nA JavaScript program is made of a collection of instructions called \"statements\". A semicolon marks the end of a statement, and allows multiple statements to be placed on the same line. However, it is typical to write each statement on its own line to keep a program file readable.\nVariables can be defined in several ways. In an older version named \"ES5\", variables are defined using the var keyword. In the newer versions after ES5, variables can be defined using const for constant variables and let for local variables. The value of constant variables cannot be re-declared or reassigned. Variables assigned using const or let are contained within blocks, while variables assigned using var are contained within functions.\n// ES5\nvar x = 1;\n// ES6+\nconst y = 10;\nlet t = 5;\nExamples.\nThe script below prints \"Example\" on the screen. The lines that start with codice_1 are comments, which are used to describe the actions of the program.\nfunction sayHi() {\n let name = prompt(\"What's your name?\"); \n // this name is saved to a variable\n alert(\"Hello \" + name);\n // whatever the name is, the browser alerts \"hello (name)\"\n // a variable was used (name)\nsayHi(); // Runs the function sayHi\n/* This is also a comment, but it can span multiple lines.\n Like this.\nIn the above code it says codice_2\nIf you want to put JavaScript in your HTML, you put it between an opening codice_3 and closing codice_4 tag. These tags mean that whatever is between them is a script and not text to be put onto the web page. The script below inserts the numbers 1 through 10 at the bottom of a webpage:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;\n&lt;head&gt;\n &lt;title&gt;Example page&lt;/title&gt;\n &lt;script&gt; // This is the script tag\n for (let counter = 1; counter &lt;= 10; counter++) {\n document.body.innerHTML = document.body.innerHTML + counter + \"&lt;br&gt;\";\n /*\n This puts the number, then a new line element (&lt;br&gt;),\n at the end of the web page.\n \n // End javascript: &lt;/script&gt;\n&lt;/head&gt;\n&lt;body&gt;&lt;/body&gt;\nThe codice_5 loop makes whatever code is between the codice_6 and the codice_7 happen more than one time. In this case, it keeps looping until codice_8 is equal to 10, then it stops. This means it equals ten. It's a bit confusing at first, but it works.\nDifferences between Java and Javascript.\nfunction sayHi() {\n alert(\"Hi!\");\nsayBye = function() {\n alert(\"Bye!\");\nsayHi();\nsayBye();"}
{"id": "20873", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20873", "title": "C.G. Jung", "text": ""}
{"id": "20874", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20874", "title": "C. G. Jung", "text": ""}
{"id": "20881", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20881", "title": "World Money Fair", "text": "The World Money Fair is an international bourse of coins. A \"bourse\" is where dealers, collectors and the public to buy, sell and trade coins. \nIn 1970 A. M Beck founded in Muinch the \"Organisation of European Coins-Bourses\", \"Organisation Europ\u00e4ischer M\u00fcnzen-B\u00f6rsen\" (OEMB) in German. He had the idea to build up a stronger market for the collecting of coins.\nTwo years later the organisation organized in Basel the 1st international bourse of coins. During the time it was developed to the \"World Money Fair\". Today more than 40 nations are members of this organisation. In 2006, the bourse is at the 1st time in Berlin. At the start the German Secretary of State Karl Diller presented the new German 2 Euro Coin. It shows the Holstentor of L\u00fcbeck."}
{"id": "20951", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20951", "title": "Autocracy", "text": "Autocracy is a form of government. In an autocracy, a single person has all legal and political power, and makes all decisions by himself or herself. The person who holds the power is called an autocrat.\nWhen there is a monarch ruling a country as an absolute monarchy, this is also called an autocracy. Having an autocratic government does not mean the country is governed well or governed poorly. It is just a description on how it is set up.The two types of Autocracy are Absolute monarchy and Dictatorship \nIn modern times, most autocrats gain power as part of a larger nationalist, communist, or fascist movement. Once in power, they eliminate all other kinds of authority in the country, such as judges, the legislature, and political parties.\nHistorical examples of autocracies include: The Aztec Empire in Mesoamerica, in it, the Aztec Emperor functioned as both the sole ruler of the Empire himself, as well as of its military, he also was the religious figurehead behind the empire's aggressive foreign policy (In this time, the priesthood supported a pantheon that demanded human sacrifice, and the nobility consisted mainly of warriors who had captured many prisoners for these sacrificial rites), Eastern Han under Dong Zhuo, the Empire of Japan under Hirohito, and the Roman Empire, in 27 B.C., Augustus founded the Roman Empire following the end of the Roman Republic. Augustus officially kept the Roman Senate while effectively consolidating all of the real power and influence in himself. In recent years dictators have been called autocratic."}
{"id": "20953", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20953", "title": "Oligarchy", "text": "Oligarchy is a form of government. In an oligarchic system, all the power is held by a small group of people. It is usually the most powerful people who govern the state. It was used in Sparta, where the kingship alternated between three leading families.\nRule by the best.\nAn oligarchy where \"the best\" rule is called \"Aristocracy\".\nRule by the rich.\nIf the richest people rule the country, this is called \"Plutocracy\"."}
{"id": "20959", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20959", "title": "Punctuation", "text": "Punctuation is the name for marks used in writing text. They are to help understanding and the correct reading. These are some common punctuation marks used in English:\nThere are other punctuation marks but used less often. Other languages have other marks, such as French using \"guillemets\", codice_1 as quotation marks.\nRules of punctuation.\nThe use of punctuation in English can change from place to place and from time to time, for the rules in use at that location. Modern typography suggests that punctuation should only be used when there is a need. That results in less punctuation than was the case in the early 20th century.\nThe use of these marks is often decided by a group or organization and then written down into a style guide of format rules. Newspapers have a style guide to make their content use the same rules (for consistency).\nReasons for punctuation.\nIn the second example, no style guide will help. The writer just has to make sure that the sentence is understood as it is written. Punctuation is there to help the reader make sense of what is written. Often it is best to change the sentence so that the meaning does not rest on a comma.\nThat seems to make the meanings clear.\nPeriod or full stop.\nA period (U.S.A.), full stop (U.K. and Commonwealth) or full point (typography and printing), looks like this: .\nA period or stop is used to end a sentence. The period plus a space separates sentences in prose, and makes it easier to read. If they are not needed, they should not be used. So, for example, in a list format it is obvious when a section ends, therefore it does not need a full stop.\nA period can show numbers that are smaller than one. With money, a period is used to show the amount of money less than one dollar.\nA period is sometimes used to show that a word has been made shorter. A word that is made shorter with a period is called an abbreviation.\nComma.\nA comma looks like this: ,\nA comma has many uses. Some of these are shown below:\nQuestion mark.\nA question mark looks like this: ?\nQuestion marks are used when writing a question, to make an inquiry, or to ask something.\nExclamation mark.\nAn exclamation mark looks like this: !\nAn exclamation mark is used to write about a suprise or emotion, or to write the words a person shouted. It can be used to make a statement stronger or more forceful.\nApostrophe.\nAn apostrophe looks like this: '\nAn apostrophe has two main uses:\nOwnership.\nAn apostrophe can be used to show that something belongs to someone else.\nIf there is only one thing, the letter \"s\" is used after an apostrophe to show ownership.\nSometimes the letter \"s\" is not used after an apostrophe to show ownership. A word will end with just an apostrophe if there is more than one thing and the word already ends with an \"s\".\nContractions.\nAn apostrophe can be used to put two small words together. Two small words that are put together with an apostrophe to make one word are called contractions. This is normal in writing about a person speaking. Spoken English often uses contractions because these words are easier to say.\nCommon mistakes when using apostrophes.\nPronouns do not use an apostrophe to show that something belongs to something else. Among these are \"its\", \"his\", \"hers\", \"theirs\".\nPlurals (words referring to more than one thing) do not need an apostrophe.\nQuotation marks.\nQuotation marks (also called quote marks or quotes for short) are used around the words that people have said, or direct speech. They are used in pairs.\nOrder of punctuation.\nWhen quotation marks sit next to periods and commas, there are two styles of punctuation. These two styles are most commonly referred to as \"American\" and \"British\"; the British one is also called \"logical quotation\".\nBoth systems have the same rules regarding question marks, exclamation points, colons, and semicolons. But they differ in how they treat full stops and commas.\nIn all major forms of English, question marks, exclamation marks, semicolons, and any other punctuation are placed inside or outside the closing quotation mark depending on whether they are part of the quoted material.\nBritish practice.\nThe style in the United Kingdom and other non-American places is called British style, \nlogical quotation, \nor logical punctuation. it includes inside quotation marks only those punctuation marks which appeared in the \"original\" quoted material. Otherwise it places punctuation outside the closing quotation marks. Fowler's \"A Dictionary of Modern English Usage\" provides an early example of the rule: \"All signs of punctuation used with words in quotation marks must be placed \"according to the sense\".\"\nWhen dealing with words-as-words, short-form works and sentence fragments, this style places periods and commas outside the quotation marks:\nWith direct speech, British placing depends on whether or not the quoted statement is complete or a fragment. According to the British style guide \"Butcher's Copy-editing\", American style should be used when writing fiction. In non-fiction, some British publishers may permit placing punctuation that is not part of the person's speech inside the quotation marks but prefer that it be placed outside. Periods and commas that \"are\" part of the person's speech are permitted inside the quotation marks regardless of whether the material is fiction.\nU.S. practice.\nIn the United States, the prevailing style is called American style, whereby commas and periods are almost always placed inside closing quotation marks. This style of punctuation is common in the U.S. and to a lesser extent, Canada as well., and is the style usually recommended by \"The Chicago Manual of Style\" and most other American style guides.\nWhen dealing with words-as-words, short-form works and sentence fragments, standard American style places periods and commas inside the quotation marks:\nThis style also places periods and commas inside the quotation marks when dealing with direct speech, regardless of whether the work is fiction or non-fiction:\nEnding the sentence.\nIn both major styles, regardless of placement, only one end mark (?, !, or .) can end a sentence. Only the period, however, \"may not\" end a quoted sentence when it does not also end the enclosing sentence, except for literal text:\nColon.\nThis is a colon: :\nColons can be used at the beginning of a list. \"This is a list of animals: birds, cats, insects, pigs, and sheep.\".\nColons can be used to replace a semicolon in between two parts of a sentence, but this is not common today.\nStandard English usage is to have no spaces before, and one space after a colon.\nSemicolon.\nA semicolon looks like this: ;\nA semicolon has only two uses. First, to connect two independent clauses into a single sentence. For example:\n\"I could tell that it was getting late; it was growing darker by the second.\"\nThe second use of a semicolon is to separate items in a series when the items contain parenthetical elements within themselves. For example:\n\"The following crewmembers were on the bridge: James T. Kirk, captain of the\nEnterprise; Mr. Spock, first science officer; Mr. Sulu, helmsman; Mr. Scott,\nengineer; and Dr. McCoy, chief medical officer.\"\nA semicolon is also used with a conjunctive adverb when joining two clauses. In reality, this is the same as the first rule, but it looks different enough to sometimes cause concern.\nFor example:\n\"huzaifa, context in which all life exists; consequently, it is more than a political issue.\"\nEllipsis.\nAn ellipsis is a mark that looks like this: ...\nIt is used to show where words have been omitted when writing what a person said. It can also be used to show that there is more to be said but the person stopped at that point.\nHyphen.\nA hyphen looks like this: -. Hyphens have many uses in writing:"}
{"id": "20961", "revid": "1122617", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20961", "title": "Land", "text": "Land can mean some territory, forming part of a country. Roughly 22% of the surface of Earth is land, while the rest is covered with water. Land can have different types of soil; it may be covered with stones, sand, dirt, etc. Sometimes it is not clear where land ends and a body of water begins."}
{"id": "20962", "revid": "7505360", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20962", "title": "Surface", "text": "A surface is the outer part of something. Most surfaces have a width and a length, but no depth. \nSurfaces are studied in geometry. "}
{"id": "20963", "revid": "7430225", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20963", "title": "Sexual slavery", "text": "Sexual slavery is a special case of slavery or forced labour. Sexual slaves are like normal slaves, except for the following:\nThis term is also used by the Vienna Declaration for the women's rights and by the name of humanitarian international law."}
{"id": "20964", "revid": "929313", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20964", "title": "List of Internet top-level domains", "text": "Here is a list of currently existing top-level domains (TLDs)."}
{"id": "20965", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20965", "title": "1784", "text": ""}
{"id": "20967", "revid": "1043801", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20967", "title": "List of Atlantic hurricane seasons", "text": "The following is a list of Atlantic hurricane seasons. All began on June 1 in their respective years. They ended on November 30. These dates are when tropical cyclones usually form in the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe Atlantic hurricane season is the time of year that hurricanes form in the northern Atlantic Ocean. The season starts on June 1 and ends November 30. There is an average of ten tropical storms, six hurricanes, and two or three major hurricanes in the Atlantic.\nThe National Hurricane Center helps watch for hurricanes in the northern Atlantic and makes forecasts about were the storms will go.\n1800s.\n1800\u20131809 \n1810\u20131819 \n1820\u20131829 \n1830\u20131839 \n1840\u20131849 \n1850\u20131859 \n1860\u20131869 \n1870 \n1871\u20131879\n1880\n1881\n1882\n1883\n1884\n1885\n1886\n1887\n1888\n1889\n1890\n1891\n1892\n1893\n1894\n1895\n1896\n1897\n1898\n1899\n1900s.\n1900\n1901\n1902\n1903\n1904\n1905\n1906\n1907\n1908 \n1909\n1910\n1911\n1912\n1913\n1914\n1915\n1916\n1917\n1918\n1919\n1920\n1921\n1922\n1923\n1924\n1925\n1926\n1927\n1928\n1929\n1930\n1931\n1932\n1933\n1934\n1935\n1936\n1937\n1938\n1939\n1940\n1941\n1942\n1943\n1944\n1945\n1946\n1947\n1948\n1949\n1950\n1951\n1952\n1953\n1954\n1955\n1956\n1957\n1958\n1959\n1960\n1961\n1962\n1963\n1964\n1965\n1966\n1967\n1968\n1969\n1970\n1971\n1972\n1973\n1974\n1975\n1976\n1977\n1978\n1979\n1980\n1981\n1982\n1983\n1984\n1985\n1986\n1987\n1988\n1989\n1990\n1991\n1992\n1993\n1994\n1995\n1996\n1997\n1998\n1999\n2000s.\n2000\n2001\n2002\n2003\n2004\n2005\n2006\n2007\n2008\n2009\n2010\n2011\n2012\n2013\n2014\n2015\n2016\n2017\n2018\n2019\n2020\n2021"}
{"id": "20969", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20969", "title": "List of Pacific hurricane seasons", "text": "The following is a list of Pacific hurricane seasons. They all began on May 15 in the eastern Pacific and June 1 in the central Pacific in their respective years. There, they end on November 30. These dates are when tropical cyclones usually form in the eastern Pacific Ocean.\nBefore the satellite age started in the 1960s, data on east Pacific hurricanes is extremely unreliable. Most east Pacific storms are of no threat to land.\n1900s.\n1950\n1951\n1952\n1953\n1954\n1955\n1956\n1957\n1958\n1959\n1960\n1961\n1962\n1963\n1964\n1965\n1966\n1967\n1968\n1969\n1970\n1971\n1972\n1973\n1974\n1975\n1976\n1977\n1978\n1979\n1980\n1981\n1982\n1983\n1984\n1985\n1986\n1987\n1988\n1989\n1990\n1991\n1992\n1993\n1994\n1995\n1996\n1997\n1998\n1999\n2000s.\n2000\n2001\n2002\n2003\n2004\n2005\n2006\n2007\n2008\n2009\n2010\n2011\n2012"}
{"id": "20976", "revid": "793", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20976", "title": "Viagra", "text": ""}
{"id": "20977", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20977", "title": "1963 Atlantic hurricane season", "text": "The 1963 Atlantic hurricane season started on June 1, 1963, and ended in November 30, 1963.\nThe most famous hurricane of the season was Hurricane Flora. It was one of the most deadly. It killed 7,200 people in Haiti and Cuba.\nStorms.\nHurricane Arlene.\nA group of clouds in the central Atlantic became a tropical storm on July 31. It went to the west and it became a hurricane on August 2. The hurricane quickly became a category 2 hurricane with 100\u00a0mph (160\u00a0km/h) winds. Arlene got to Bermuda on August 9. Afterwards it got wind speeds of 100\u00a0mph (160\u00a0km/h) again that night. It got weaker until it left the tropics on August 11. No one died from it.\nHurricane Beulah.\nBefore Hurricane Beulah there was a tropical wave moving in the tropical Atlantic. It was put together enough to be called a tropical depression on August 20, and it became strong enough to be called a tropical storm the next day. Beulah moved to the northwest, becoming a hurricane on the 22nd and a big hurricane on the 24th. The hurricane moved to the north.\nTropical Storm Three.\nA weak storm north of Puerto Rico moved northeast. It became a tropical depression on September 10. It became a tropical storm on the 11th. This small storm had 60\u00a0mph (100\u00a0km/h) winds on the 12th. That was the fastest the winds would become. \nHurricane Cindy.\nOver the Gulf of Mexico Cindy turned into a tropical storm on September 16. Cindy turned into a hurricane the next day. It did not become any stronger before it got to High Island, Texas. Cindy brought a lot of rain to southeast Texas as it moved to the southwest over the state. The hurricane weakened on the 20th, after causing $12.5 million (1963 dollars) in damage. It killed three people.\nHurricane Debra.\nOn September 19, a tropical wave became a tropical depression in the Atlantic Ocean. It turned into a tropical storm on the 21st. It did not hit the islands as it moved north. Debra became a hurricane later on the 21st.\nHurricane Edith.\nThe Intertropical Convergence Zone developed a tropical depression on September 23, east of the Lesser Antilles. It moved west and it became a hurricane on the 24th. It went through the Windward Islands on the 25th as a hurricane with 95\u00a0mph (140\u00a0km/h) winds. Upper-level winds made it stay as a minimal hurricane before it got to Dominican Republic on the 27th. The island killed the hurricane. Edith was gone by the 29th. Edith killed ten people in Martinique, injured 50 people across the Caribbean, and caused $47 million in damage. It was unlucky that Hurricane Flora came just days later.\nHurricane Flora.\nHurricane Flora was the deadliest hurricane of the season. It killed over 7,000 people and created hundreds of millions of dollars in damage.\nHurricane Ginny.\nGinny was strange. It is one of the most recent hurricanes to make landfall near New England. It made 18 inches (50\u00a0cm) of snow over Maine. The hurricane killed 7 people and created $300,000 in damage (1963 dollars).\nTropical Storm Helena.\nTropical Storm Helena formed on October 25. It reached its maximum of 50\u00a0mph (80\u00a0km/h) before it hit the Lesser Antilles. Helena's strength changed a lot for the next 3 days. Though it was weak, Helena was able to kill 5 people and create $500,000 in damage.\n1963 storm names.\nThe following names were used for tropical storms and hurricanes that formed in Atlantic in 1963. Names that were not used are marked in gray.\nRetirement.\nThe name Flora was never used again."}
{"id": "20978", "revid": "794806", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20978", "title": "Sildenafil", "text": "Sildenafil is an aphrodisiac. It is a medication that is also called Viagra, Revatio and (in the Indian subcontinent) Caverta. \nSildenafil makes the blood vessels become wider. This lowers the blood pressure. Sildenafil mostly works in the penis and in the lungs. This medicine increases blood flow to the penis. This helps the penis become erect during sexual intercourse. Sildenafil also helps pulmonary hypertension. Because this medicine makes the blood vessels wider, it makes it easier for blood to flow. Sildenafil was patented in 1996 and first made to sell in 1998."}
{"id": "20979", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20979", "title": "1825", "text": ""}
{"id": "20980", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20980", "title": "1771", "text": ""}
{"id": "20981", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20981", "title": "1777", "text": ""}
{"id": "20982", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20982", "title": "1757", "text": ""}
{"id": "20983", "revid": "941292", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20983", "title": "4 BC", "text": "Year 4 BC was a common year starting on Tuesday or Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sabinus and Rufus."}
{"id": "20984", "revid": "744335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20984", "title": "Sylvester McCoy", "text": "Percy James Patrick Kent-Smith or Sylvester McCoy (born 20 August 1943) is a Scottish actor. He is best known for playing the seventh incarnation of the Doctor on \"Doctor Who\" from 1987\u20131989, he also briefly played the Doctor in beginning of the 1996 TV movie."}
{"id": "20985", "revid": "744335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20985", "title": "Paul McGann", "text": "Paul McGann (born 14 November 1959) is an English actor. He is best known for his roles in \"Withnail and I\" (1987) and as the Eighth Doctor in the 1996 \"Doctor Who\" television movie."}
{"id": "20986", "revid": "793", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20986", "title": "Georgia O'Keefe", "text": ""}
{"id": "20987", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20987", "title": "Georgia O'Keeffe", "text": "Georgia O\u2019Keeffe (November 15 1887 \u2013 March 6 1986) was an American artist. She was born near Sun Prairie, Wisconsin, U.S. O'Keeffe studied art at the Art Institute of Chicago, Art Students' League, University of Virginia, Charlottesville and Teachers College.\nShe is mainly known for her modernist paintings. These paintings use both \"abstract\" and \"concrete\" elements.\nFamily.\nGeorgia O'Keeffe married Alfred Stieglitz in 1924. Stieglitz was a famous photographer and he helped O'Keeffe gain success in her career. He owned the first studio her art was displayed in. Georgia and Alfred evidently wrote over 25,000 love letters to each other.\nAuction record.\nO'Keefe holds the world auction record for a painting by a woman (November 2014). Her \"Jimson Weed/White Flower No 1\" sold for $44.4m (\u00a328.8m) at the O'Keeffe Museum in Santa Fe, New Mexico, which has many of the artist's works. O'Keeffe's large-format depictions of flowers which she painted as if they had been seen in close-up. Sotheby's in New York said the $15m (\u00a39.5m) estimate on O'Keeffe's work was shattered by intense bidding between two rivals."}
{"id": "20988", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20988", "title": "Genesis (band)", "text": "Genesis is an English progressive rock group. They formed in 1967. They have sold about 150 million albums all over the world. This puts them among the top 30 best-selling recording artists of all time. The group's members have included Peter Gabriel and Phil Collins. Both of them were successful as solo artists as well.\nMembers of the group.\nOver the years, Genesis has changed members more than once. The first line-up was Peter Gabriel (vocals), Anthony Phillips (guitar), Tony Banks (keyboards), Mike Rutherford (bass &amp; guitar), and Chris Stewart (drums).\nOther drummers until 1970 were John Silver and John Mayhew. In August 1970, Phil Collins began playing drums for Genesis. In some songs, he also sang. The same year Phillips left, and Steve Hackett joined as a guitarist in 1971.\nThe band also made a song called \"Supper's Ready\" which is almost 23 minutes long. Many fans call it their best because it has many different parts.\nAfter the release of the album \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" (1974), Gabriel left the band. Collins took over the singing. He was singer for Genesis from 1976 to 1996. When Hackett also left, in 1977 there were only three members left. The 1978 album was called \"...And Then There Were Three...\" because of this.\nThe band ended up making lots of well-known songs, like Abacab, Invisible Touch and No Son of Mine.\nThe last studio album with Collins was \"We Can't Dance\" in 1991. He left the band in 1996 and was replaced with singer Ray Wilson. Because the album \"Calling All Stations\" (1997) with Ray Wilson was not very successful, the group disbanded.\nAfter a break of eight years, Genesis started a world tour in 2006. The members now are Phil Collins, Mike Rutherford and Tony Banks. The band disbanded again at 2011 due to Collins retiring and Collins came back from retiring at 2015.\nGenesis were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2010."}
{"id": "20992", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20992", "title": "Something Awful Forums", "text": ""}
{"id": "20993", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20993", "title": "Nerve agent.", "text": ""}
{"id": "20994", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20994", "title": "Nuclear bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "20995", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20995", "title": "Atom bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "20996", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20996", "title": "A-bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "20997", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20997", "title": "H-bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "20998", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20998", "title": "Thermonuclear weapon", "text": ""}
{"id": "20999", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20999", "title": "Fusion bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "21000", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21000", "title": "Learning difficulties", "text": ""}
{"id": "21002", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21002", "title": "Particles", "text": ""}
{"id": "21003", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21003", "title": "Cookery book", "text": ""}
{"id": "21004", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21004", "title": "Nuclear warhead", "text": ""}
{"id": "21005", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21005", "title": "Atom Bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "21008", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21008", "title": "Bones", "text": ""}
{"id": "21011", "revid": "6706845", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21011", "title": "Deadly nightshade", "text": "Deadly nightshade or belladonna (\"Atropa belladonna\") is a well-known, hardy perennial shrub. It is a member of the nightshade family. \nOriginally, it grew in Europe, North Africa, and Asia. It has also been seen in North America, but is far less common there. Usually it grows in the shade. The plant does not like direct sunlight. Often it grows in places where the soil is rich in limestone. \nBelladonna is poisonous.\nMost parts of the plant are known to be very poisonous. Children have died from eating as few as three berries. One leaf contains enough poison to kill an adult. The root usually contains the most poison.\nThe poison present in the plant is called atropine.\nEffects of the poison.\nThe effects of atropine are dilated (big) pupils, hallucinations, and difficulty in seeing (the vision may not be as sharp as always, it may be difficult to focus on some object). Problems keeping upright, feeling like one is flying, and being confused are also symptoms.\nThe pulse of the victim grows faster and faster, and the rate at which the heart is beating will go up. Toxic reaction to atropine causes fever, delirium, stupor and rash on head, neck and upper trunk. There may be agitation, difficulty in speaking and swallowing. Coma and convulsions usually come before death."}
{"id": "21012", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21012", "title": "Perennial", "text": "A perennial is a plant that bears leaves and perhaps flowers every year. Some plants only bear leaves and flowers once, then they die. Such plants are called \"annual\". Other plants live for two years. They are called \"biennial\".\nMost trees and shrubs are perennial plants."}
{"id": "21014", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21014", "title": "Shrub", "text": " \nA shrub or bush is a category of plants. A tree usually has one stem, which at some height has branches. A \"shrub\" can have multiple stems from the bottom up. Usually, bushes do not grow as tall as trees, very often they are less than 1\u20132 m tall.\nVery many plants can be either shrubs or trees, depending on the growing conditions. Small, low shrubs such as lavender, periwinkle and thyme are often termed subshrubs. Shrubs can be either deciduous or evergreen.\nA shrubbery is a garden with shrubs as the main feature.\nShrubs as a botanical structural form.\nIn botany and ecology a shrub is more specifically used to describe the particular physical structural or plant life-form of woody plants which are less than 8 meters high and usually have many stems arising at or near the base.\nFor example, a descriptive system widely used in Australia is based on structural characteristics based on life-form, plus the height and amount of foliage cover of the tallest layer or dominant species.\nFor shrubs 2\u20138 m high the following structural forms are categorized:\nFor shrubs less than 2 m high the following structural forms are categorized:"}
{"id": "21015", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21015", "title": "Evergreen", "text": "An evergreen is a plant which keeps its leaves throughout the year. Which is Different with deciduous plants, which lose their leaves during the winter or wet seasons. There are many different kinds of evergreen plants, both trees and shrubs."}
{"id": "21016", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21016", "title": "Deciduous", "text": "Deciduous means \"temporary\" or \"tending to fall off\" (deriving from the Latin word \"decidere\", to fall off).\nWhen talking about plants this means that the plant loses its leaves, usually in autumn. The leaves will then grow again in spring.\nWhen referring to teeth, it means the teeth at the front of the mouth that grow and fall out and are replaced in childhood. They are called .\nIn botany and horticulture, deciduous plants are trees, shrubs and herbaceous perennials which lose all of their leaves for part of the year. This is called abscission. Leaf loss happens in winter in temperate or polar climates.\nWith evergreens, foliage is shed differently from deciduous trees. They seem green year round. Plants that are intermediate may be called semi-deciduous; they lose old foliage as new growth begins. Other plants are semi-evergreen and lose their leaves before the next growing season, keeping some in winter or dry periods. Some trees, including a few species of oak, have desiccated leaves that stay on the tree through winter. These persistent dry leaves are dropped in the spring as new growth begins.\nMany deciduous plants flower during the period when they are leafless, as this increases the effectiveness of pollination. Not having leaves also improves wind transmission of pollen for wind-pollinated plants and increases the visibility of the flowers to insects in insect-pollinated plants."}
{"id": "21017", "revid": "1038592", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21017", "title": "Shade", "text": "A place is called in the shade when the sun is shining, and some object, a tree for example, blocks the direct sunlight. So the sunlight can not reach the spot. The dark image, which the object casts on the ground (or on another object) is called shadow, not \"shade\".\nShade can also mean a darker or lighter color of the same base color. For example: in a picture of a tree's shadow, the grass in the shade will be a darker \"shade\" of green than the grass out of the shade."}
{"id": "21018", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21018", "title": "Hallucination", "text": "A hallucination is seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling or feeling things that do not really exist. Usually people have to be awake and conscious to have hallucinations. That way, a person who sees or hears something that is not really there has a hallucination. Hallucinations are different from dreams. When people dream they are not awake. Hallucinations are also different from illusions. Illusions are based on real perceptions, which are distorted or interpreted in a wrong way. \nCertain drugs can cause hallucinations. Some illegal drugs are taken because they cause hallucinations. Certain mental illnesses can also cause hallucinations. In some cases, withdrawal of a drug can also cause hallucinations. This has especially been reported by people trying to stop taking sleeping pills, or by alcoholics. \nPeople who have hallucinations are not necessarily ill, lack of sleep can also cause hallucinations. Hallucinations just before going to sleep or just after waking up are considered normal. \nWhat are the different types of hallucinations?\nHallucinations can affect all of a person's senses. People with the mental illness of schizophrenia may hear sounds or voices that are not really there. People with certain mental illnesses may also have hallucinations in which they see a person or thing which is not really there. People are less likely to have hallucinations in which they smell or touch something that is not really there. Certain forms of epilepsy can cause hallucinations. Finally, hallucinations can be the result of certain substances taken or of certain physical constellations. Most of the time, these substances are taken to get the hallucinations. Sometimes, (severe) lack of sleep, or high fever can lead to hallucinations brought on by such viruses as the common cold.\nHow many people are affected by hallucinations?\nMany studies have shown hallucinatory experiences take place across the world. Several studies, one of them done as early as 1894, have reported that approximately 10% of the population experience hallucinations. A recent survey of over 13,000 people reported a much higher figure. According to the study, almost 39% of the people reported hallucinatory experiences. 27% of the people reported daytime hallucinations, mostly outside the context of illness or drug use. From this survey, hallucinations affecting smell or taste seem the most common in the general population.\nWhat are the causes of hallucinations?\nIllnesses.\nDiseases or illnesses.\nSome diseases such as brain disorders or infections may cause a person to have hallucinations. As well, an alcoholic (person who is addicted to alcohol) who stops drinking alcohol suddenly may experience a type of hallucinations called delirium tremens (or \"DT's\"). Some people have hallucinations if they do not sleep for a number of days, or if they do not eat for a number of days.\nChemicals or drugs.\nSome people have hallucinations because they purposefully or accidentally put chemicals or drugs into their bodies.\nIllegal drugs.\nSome people use illegal drugs that cause vivid hallucinations, such as LSD (\"acid\") and PCP (\"angel dust\"). Many kinds of drugs - even legal ones - will cause hallucinations, if very large doses are taken, and it is seen as a side effect.\nLegal drugs.\nSome legal drugs that dentists, doctors, or surgeons use cause hallucinations. The dentists, doctors, and surgeons use drugs called anaesthetics to make people not feel pain, or to make people become unconscious. But the drugs also have some other additional effects, which are called side effects, such as nausea (feeling sick) and hallucinations. \nMany dentists use an anaesthetic called nitrous oxide (\"laughing gas\"). Inhaling large quantities of nitrous oxide can cause people to have hallucinations. Doctors and surgeons use many types of anaesthetic gases so that patients who are being operated become unconscious. When a person inhales anaesthetic gases, they may have hallucinations for several minutes, until they become unconscious.\nAccidental poisoning.\nSome adults accidentally swallow a poisonous chemical because it is in a bottle that has the wrong label. In some cases, children swallow a poisonous chemical because they think that it is a food product or a drink. Some dangerous, poisonous chemicals which can make people very sick or even kill them also cause hallucinations.\nLack of sleep.\nSome people have hallucinations when they have not slept for a long time; other people have something resembling a hallucination before falling asleep. This is usually called hypnagogia. Most of the time, the people experiencing this kind of hallucinations are aware of the fact that they are not real."}
{"id": "21019", "revid": "6691044", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21019", "title": "Shadow", "text": "A shadow is a dark area on a bright surface. It is caused by something blocking a source of light. A shadow's outline, called a silhouette, will have the same shape as the object blocking the light.\nDepending on the light source, or sources, a wide range of effects can be produced. A point source of light casts only a simple shadow, called an \"umbra\". A \"penumbra\" is the region in which only a portion of the light source may be blocked. If there is more than one light source, there will be several shadows, with the overlapping parts darker, and various combinations of brightness or even colors. The more diffuse the lighting is, the softer and more indistinct the shadow outlines become, until they disappear. The lighting of an overcast sky produces few visible shadows,\nAstronomical shadows are usually sharp. This is because in space the light usually does not go through an atmosphere."}
{"id": "21022", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21022", "title": "Classical Greek language", "text": ""}
{"id": "21024", "revid": "294863", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21024", "title": "1553", "text": ""}
{"id": "21025", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21025", "title": "1732", "text": ""}
{"id": "21026", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21026", "title": "1768", "text": ""}
{"id": "21033", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21033", "title": "The Sims", "text": "The Sims is a video game released in 2000 . It is a life simulator that imitates real life. Sims can get jobs, have needs, and can get married. It was the third best selling computer and video game of all time (it mostly sold well on the computer).\nThe Sims was so successful it has created three sequels, (The Sims 2 in 2004, The Sims 3 in 2009, and The Sims 4 in 2014) along with many other spin-offs of the series.\nHistory.\nThe Sims was created by Will Wright, who worked at Maxis, which was owned by EA Games. It was first released in February 2000. His intention was to make an open-ended game without a set objective. This feature was the reason why it attracted so many gamers.\nGameplay.\nThe first part of the game is to make a family, or play one of the preexisting families. Every family can have children and adults. A player can choose what they look like from many different clothes and hair styles. Each family must include at least one adult.\nEach family starts with $20,000, regardless of how many sims are in the family. After the family is made, the player can move them into a lot. Some lots are empty while other lots have houses on them.\nThere are many different floor coverings, wall coverings and doors to choose from when building a house. After building, the player can purchase objects, such as a refrigerator, bed, or other things.\nPlayers control the Sims in Live Mode. The main goal is to keep the Sim's eight needs up and in the green. These needs eventually go down as time goes by. If Sims have no energy, they will fall to the ground. If they are swimming and run out of energy they will drown. If they are too hungry, they will die of starvation.\nOther goals include making money (called Simoleons in this game). Sims must get jobs to get more money so they can pay bills, buy new objects, and expand the house. If they do not go to work two days in a row, they will be fired. Each Sim has eight skill levels to work towards. Each skill level has 10 points. For instance, in the military job, the ultimate requirement is 10 body points. Jobs also require a certain number of friends to receive a promotion. The higher they go, the more money they make per day.\nChildren must go to school. If they do not keep their grades up, they will be sent to military school and will never return. They can read books to study.\nExpansion packs.\n\"The Sims\" is well known for having many expansion packs, or smaller games that add onto the main game. The player must own the original game to buy and install these packs. The Sims has 7 official expansion packs. \nOther Sims games.\nAfter it sold well on the computer, it was put on other platforms such as the PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, GameCube and Xbox. The console releases are:\nThese all follow a different concept. They are more objective-based rather than free-willed and have not been as popular as the original PC editions."}
{"id": "21034", "revid": "1166", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21034", "title": "Draw", "text": ""}
{"id": "21036", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21036", "title": "Yitzak Rabin", "text": ""}
{"id": "21038", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21038", "title": "Webcam", "text": "A webcam is a video camera that connects to a computer, and can let people see each other over the Internet. Most people that have webcams use them with an instant messenger to see each other at the same time. Webcams can also be used for recording videos and video blogs. The webcam can be part of a computer, mobile phone or it can be an independent device.\nHistory.\nThe first webcam was developed in 1991 at Cambridge University and the first commercial camera started in 1994 and was made by Logitech."}
{"id": "21041", "revid": "1026415", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21041", "title": "Y-intercept", "text": "The y-intercept of a line on a graph is where the line touches (or intercepts) the y-axis (the numbered line going straight up).\nThe equation for straight lines is formula_1. \"formula_2\" is the formula_3-intercept."}
{"id": "21050", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21050", "title": "The Last Waltz", "text": "The Last Waltz was final concert of the Canadian/American rock group The Band. It took place on Thanksgiving (November 26) in 1976 at the Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco, California. It was also made into a movie by Martin Scorsese, that came out in 1978.\nOther musicians who were in \"The Last Waltz\" concert were:"}
{"id": "21053", "revid": "863768", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21053", "title": "1436", "text": ""}
{"id": "21054", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21054", "title": "1241", "text": "1241 is a year in the 13th century."}
{"id": "21055", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21055", "title": "886", "text": ""}
{"id": "21056", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21056", "title": "1204", "text": "1204 (MCCIV) was ."}
{"id": "21057", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21057", "title": "Top-level domains", "text": ""}
{"id": "21058", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21058", "title": "TLD", "text": ""}
{"id": "21059", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21059", "title": "TLDs", "text": ""}
{"id": "21060", "revid": "1021325", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21060", "title": "985", "text": ""}
{"id": "21061", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21061", "title": "681", "text": ""}
{"id": "21062", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21062", "title": "1593", "text": ""}
{"id": "21063", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21063", "title": "1721", "text": ""}
{"id": "21064", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21064", "title": "Vedas", "text": "The Vedas are the four holiest books of the by mankind to the next, perhaps over thousands of years.\nEach book has four major kinds of text \u2013 the Samhitas (mantras and benedictions), the Aranyakas (text on rituals, ceremonies, sacrifices and symbolic-sacrifices), the Brahmanas (commentaries on rituals, ceremonies and sacrifices), and the Upanishads (texts discussing meditation, philosophy and spiritual knowledge). The Vedas are written in\"Vedic Sanskrit\".\nLater types of Hinduism that are very different from the types of Hinduism that follow the Vedas respect them.\nThe four Vedas are:\nRigveda.\nRigveda is the first of the four Vedas. Rigveda means a \"Veda of praise\". This Veda has several verses (hymns). This Veda is also the oldest Hindu holy book.\nYajurveda.\nYajurveda is the second of the four Vedas. Yajurveda means the Veda of the Yajus. Yajus were mantras sung during religious activities. Yajurveda is divided into two parts. The name of the first part is Black Yajurveda, called Taittiriya.The Taittir\u012bya Upanishad is a Vedic era Sanskrit text, embedded as three chapters of the Yajurveda. It is a mukhya Upanishad, and likely composed about 6th century BC. The Taittir\u012bya Upanishad is associated with the Taittir\u012bya school of the Yajurveda, attributed to the pupils of sage Tittiri. The name of the second part is White Yajurveda,is called Vajasaneyi.\nSamaveda.\nSamaveda is the third Veda of the four Vedas. Samaveda means the Veda of sacred songs. This Veda also has many hymns. They were sung by the Hindu priests and other Hindus during religious activities.\nAtharvaveda.\nAtharvaveda is the fourth of the four Vedas. Atharvaveda means the \"Veda of knowledge\".\nThe Atharvaveda holds key for the massive vedic knowledge on the sciences like medicine, sorcery and has many facts that the present generation is still trying to crack."}
{"id": "21067", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21067", "title": "The Adventures of Jackie Chan", "text": ""}
{"id": "21071", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21071", "title": "Intestines", "text": ""}
{"id": "21074", "revid": "7499230", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21074", "title": "Prime Minister of Greenland", "text": "The Prime Minister of Greenland (, lit \"Leader of the Government\"; ), officially referred to as the Premier, is the head of the Government of Greenland. The incumbent prime minister is M\u00fate Bourup Egede of the Siumut party. \nThe prime minister is usually leader of the majority party in the Parliament of Greenland. Jonathan Motzfeldt became Prime Minister after home rule was granted to Greenland in 1979."}
{"id": "21076", "revid": "7475996", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21076", "title": "Serbia and Montenegro", "text": "Serbia and Montenegro (Serbian: \u0421\u0440\u0431\u0438\u0458\u0430 \u0438 \u0426\u0440\u043d\u0430 \u0413\u043e\u0440\u0430, Srbija i Crna Gora, abbreviated as \"SCG\") was the name of the state union of Serbia and Montenegro. They used to be two separate Yugoslav republics. In 2006, they became their own countries. \nIt was on the west-central Balkan Peninsula, next Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia on the western sides, Hungary to the north, Romania and Bulgaria to the east, North Macedonia to the south and Albania to the southwest, with just over 200 km of coast on the Adriatic.\nSerbia and Montenegro worked together in only some political areas. The states had separate economic policies and currencies (money). Although both the states now had more freedom to do as they pleased than they did as Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Serbia and Montenegro was still a Sovereign State united under one government.\nThe people of Montenegro still wanted independence though, on 21 May 2006 they held a vote to ask the Montenegrin's whether they still wanted to stay in the union. The vote for independence won by 55.5%. On 3 June 2006 Montenegro declared independence; followed by Serbia's deceleration of independence two days later on the 5 June."}
{"id": "21079", "revid": "40117", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21079", "title": "Kitty", "text": ""}
{"id": "21080", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21080", "title": "Spirits", "text": ""}
{"id": "21081", "revid": "1084962", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21081", "title": "Minister (government)", "text": "A Minister can be a Member of Parliament, or a Clergyman (person who works as a Minister in the Church). This article talks about a Minister as a Member of Parliament.\nWhat is a minister?\nA Minister is a Member of Parliament who has a special role dealing with a certain area of Government. In the British Government, there are Ministers for lots of different things, like Children, Work &amp; Pensions and Culture, Media &amp; Sport. There are descriptions (things that describe) of what these people do at the bottom of this page.\nMinisters in the government report to the Prime Minister, who also tells them what they need to do in relation to their jobs. The Deputy Prime Minister also reports to the Prime Minister.\nOther Ministers, even though they are not called Ministers, include the Foreign Secretary, and the Home Secretary.\nWhat describes these jobs?\nMinister for Children\nThe Minister for Children looks after children's rights - these are laws which take care of how children are treated by their parents or guardians (a guardian is someone who looks after a child when their parents are not able to), and their care in society. The job means that this Minister has a special role in the lives of all children in the UK.\nMinister for Work and Pensions\nThis Minister looks after jobs (Employment) and money given to people who are in need (Welfare Benefits). They set the rules saying what people who have no job must do to try and get one, and how much money people who have no job or are in need, get to live on. The Minister also sets rules about what happens to people who do not do enough to find a job, or who break the law by working while they are getting Welfare Benefits.\nMinister for Culture, Media and Sport\nThis Minister has a special role which means they promote (make popular) British Culture and Traditions. They also take care of Broadcasting laws and laws about what newspapers and television stations can and cannot do. Also, they have a duty to promote sporting activities which take place in Britain and help the government attract major sports events to Britain (the recent decision to let Britain host the Olympic Games in 2012 is an example of this).\nThere are a lot of other Ministers in the Government, and you can find out about them by writing to the \"Houses of Parliament\"' in London. Their address is:\nThe Houses of Parliament\nWestminster\nLondon\nSW1A 0AA\nWhat about other countries?\nOther countries also have Ministers who, like those in Britain, deal with special things related to how people live. You can find out about them by looking at the Wikipedia in your own country."}
{"id": "21083", "revid": "24306", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21083", "title": "Jealousy", "text": "Jealousy or envy is a feeling (or emotion) people get when they want what others have. This is a negative feeling. When someone is jealous of someone else, they usually dislike the other person. These particular emotions are usually caused by a person having a certain object or quality which you desire but can not obtain. Jealousy is caused by lacking of self confidence and judging your abilities. Jealousy is not reasonable rationally. "}
{"id": "21084", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21084", "title": "Anger", "text": "Anger is one of the basic emotions. It is an inherited response, and is common to all mammals and a number of other animals. It happens when we are threatened, offended, wronged, or denied something we really want or need.\nPsychology of anger.\nAnger is a normal emotion. It involves a strong, uncomfortable and emotional response to a provocation. There is a sharp distinction between anger and aggression (verbal or physical, direct or indirect). Both influence each other. Anger can start aggression or increase its probability or intensity. However, it is not necessary nor sufficient for aggression.\nAnger is a bit like a pressure cooker: we can only apply pressure against our anger for a certain amount of time until it explodes.\nPeople show anger to others by their face, what they do with their body, not trying to understand or help other people's problems, and sometimes acts of aggression or force in public (e.g. punching a wall). Animals and humans might try to scare- by making loud sounds, trying to make their bodies look bigger, by showing their teeth, or by staring.\nWhen we face a challenge, our response may be anger or fear. It may be difficult to decide whether to face the challenge, or walk away. In animal behaviour terms, we face the choice of a fight or flight response.\nHormones and body changes.\nBeing angry changes the human body by making the heart beat faster, increasing blood pressure (the pressure made by the blood at right angles of the walls of blood vessels) and increasing amounts of the hormones adrenaline and noradrenaline (chemicals which send messages to parts of the body to make changes).\nBeing angry makes the levels of the hormones adrenaline and noradrenaline in the body go up, although this does not last for very long. Adrenaline quickly makes the body ready to act when there is important trouble by increasing the supply of oxygen and glucose (needed to make energy) to the brain and muscles, while slowing less important things the body is doing, like digesting food.\nNoradrenaline is released during stress. It goes to areas of the brain which control attention (how much you think or concentrate) and reactions. It is very important when the body chooses \"fight-or-flight\" (attacking or running away). Then it increases heart rate, takes glucose out of storage so it can be used, and increases blood flow to muscles.\nSymptoms.\nAnger may be passive anger or aggressive anger.\nThese two types of anger have some characteristic symptoms:\nPassive anger.\nPassive anger can be expressed in various ways. Basically it means being angry, but not facing the issue at hand. \nAggressive anger.\nThe symptoms of aggressive anger are:"}
{"id": "21085", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21085", "title": "Jump", "text": ""}
{"id": "21095", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21095", "title": "Light microscope", "text": "A light microscope works like a refracting telescope except that the object is very close to the objective lens. An object to be studied, for example a tiny organism so small it looks like just a dot, is put on a slide, which is usually a flat piece of glass. The clips on the microscope's flat stage hold the slide in place. The stage can be adjusted to add more light. It also moves to allow different layers of the object to be in focus. The user looks through the microscope eyepiece. A mirror at the bottom of the microscope reflects light rays up to the object through a hole in the stage. Objective lenses magnify the image which is made even larger when it is seen through the eyepiece lenses. Some light microscopes are actually digital cameras, made to photograph small things but having no eyepiece.\nMany microscopes, often used in colleges and high schools, normally have a top magnification of 40x with the option of having 4x and 8x. This lets the microscope show basic cells and other items. Others can magnify hundreds of times, or thousands.\nComponents.\nAll modern optical microscopes designed for viewing samples by transmitted light share the same basic components of the light path, listed here in the order the light travels through them. Also almost all microscopes have the same 'structural' components:\nThese entries are numbered according to the image on the right.\nAlternatives.\nOptical microscopes cannot show things that are smaller than light waves, because of the diffraction limit. Microscopes which can see smaller things include:"}
{"id": "21115", "revid": "16647", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21115", "title": "Big Ten", "text": ""}
{"id": "21116", "revid": "1051124", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21116", "title": "Rembrandt", "text": "Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn (Leiden, 15 July 1606 \u2013 Amsterdam, 4 October 1669) was a famous Dutch painter and artist.\nHe is generally considered one of the greatest painters and printmakers in European art history, and the most important in Dutch history.p420 His contributions to art came in a period that historians call the \"Dutch Golden Age\".\nAfter his success as a young portrait painter, he had personal tragedy and financial hardships in his later years. Yet his etchings and paintings were popular throughout his lifetime, and his reputation as an artist remained high.p427 For twenty years he taught nearly every important Dutch painter.p203\nRembrandt's greatest creative work is seen in his portraits of his contemporaries, self-portraits and illustrations of scenes from the Bible. His self-portraits are a unique biography, in which the artist surveyed himself without vanity and with the utmost sincerity.p420\nPersonal life.\nHe went to the University Leiden but he liked painting better so he became a painter. In 1631 he went to live in Amsterdam, because people there had heard of him and wanted him to paint their portraits. He married a woman called Saskia van Uylenberg in 1634. They had four children, but three of them died very young. Only their fourth child, Titus, who was born in 1641, survived into adulthood. Saskia died in 1642 soon after Titus's birth, probably from tuberculosis.\nDuring Saskia's illness, a nurse was hired, who probably also became Rembrandt's lover. She later charged Rembrandt with breach of promise and was awarded 200 guilders a year.p28 When Rembrandt learned she had pawned Saskia's jewellery, which Rembrandt had given her, he had her committed for twelve years to a poorhouse (a 'bridewell') at Gouda.\nRembrandt then lived with a young woman called Hendrickje Stoffels from Bredevoort who had been his maid. They had a daughter called Cornelia. Rembrandt died in Amsterdam on 4 October 1669.\nWorks.\nRembrandt painted many famous pictures. The portraits use light and dark colors; people sitting in the pictures are often shown in a calm or thoughtful appearance. He was such a good painter, that many of his pictures make people feel as if they are taking part in what is happening. Paintings by Rembrandt can be seen in art galleries all over the world.\nThroughout his work Rembrandt used colour which darkens as it approaches the edge of the painting, and lighter towards the center. There is always a certain person, or event, or group of people that is near the center, and they are shown to be brighter than the rest of the picture. The dark backgrounds are painted to be very interesting and important. In most of his paintings, there are deep whites and blacks which shows contrast between different parts of the work."}
{"id": "21117", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21117", "title": "Rembrandt van Rijn", "text": ""}
{"id": "21118", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21118", "title": "Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn", "text": ""}
{"id": "21119", "revid": "973399", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21119", "title": "Major movie studios", "text": "Big Five are the United States's major movie production studios which also distribute their product. All of them have historic flagship production facilities near Hollywood.\nAll Big Five major studios (Walt Disney Pictures, Warner Bros. Pictures, Paramount Pictures, Universal Pictures, and Columbia Pictures) are parts of much larger business enterprises, with their corporate headquarters offices far from Hollywood.\nThe group of major studios long numbered seven, but was reduced to six with the fading from importance of MGM in the 1980s.\nThey became five when, on November 6, 2017 - Disney announced its deal to buy Fox for $52.4 billion.\nThe American major studios.\nCurrent.\nMajors\nMini-Majors\nFormer.\nMajor\nOther"}
{"id": "21120", "revid": "7774367", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21120", "title": "Culinary mustard", "text": "Culinary mustard is a condiment people use when making food. It comes from the seeds of the mustard plant.\nPreparation.\nMustard is prepared by grinding the seeds of the Mustard plant, and mixing them with water or vinegar. Depending on which seeds are taken, and/or how much vinegar is added, the mustard may turn out hotter or less hot.\nUse.\nMost mustard is made available as a bottled condiment and can be spread on a slice of sandwich bread, salad, vegetables, meat or squirted onto a hotdog or a potato salade the best type of salde in the world, along with ketchup, horseradish and other spices. It is often found in fast-food restaurants in the form of a small packet which the diner may open and squeeze into the dish of choice."}
{"id": "21121", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21121", "title": "Condiment", "text": "A condiment is a prepared food that is put to other food, to make the food better or taste different. It usually is in the form of a sauce or a powder. Salt and pepper are examples of well-known condiments. Ketchup, mustard, relish, mayonnaise, horseradish, soy sauce and Worcestershire sauce are also well-known condiments."}
{"id": "21123", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21123", "title": "Mustard", "text": ""}
{"id": "21127", "revid": "1117734", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21127", "title": "Vinegar", "text": "Vinegar is a liquid containing mainly water and acetic acid and used mostly in cooking. It can be made from wine or other liquids containing alcohol, like cider or fermented fruit juices. Ethanol is oxidized from the liquid, resulting in vinegar.\nVinegar made from dates is a traditional product of the Middle East. It can also be made through the use of certain bacteria. Vinegar contains about 5% of Acetic acid. The acid makes it sour. \nIn cooking, it is often used as a condiment to add to salad, fish, french fries and vegetables like pickles and cabbage. It is much used in salad dressings.\nThe pH of vinegar depends on how much acid is in it. Apple cider vinegar is typically between pH 4.25 and 5.00 if undiluted. Distilled vinegar has a pH of around 2.4."}
{"id": "21128", "revid": "340704", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21128", "title": "Insecticide", "text": "An insecticide is a poison made to kill insects and spiders.\nInsects are very tough animals that have adapted to a great variety of settings. Therefore, the poison used to kill them is also deadly to humans. There can be great danger of eating pesticide when you have vegetables. This is why often people will rub an apple on their jumper before eating it. This adds a nice shine to the apple and rubs away some of the pesticides. If you do not clean the jumper there is a risk pesticide might build up."}
{"id": "21130", "revid": "6881371", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21130", "title": "Paranoia", "text": "Paranoia is a mental health condition that affects a person's thoughts. A person with paranoia is called paranoid. Paranoia is a thought process heavily influenced by anxiety or fear, often to the point of irrationality and delusion.\nA paranoid person's thinking is shaped by fear and anxiety. For example, the person may fear that other people are \"out to get them\" or are planning to hurt them. They may believe that video cameras are watching them, or that a certain group (like the police or CIA) is following them. They may also believe that other people can control their thoughts or use magic to hurt them. Even if these fears seem strange or absurd to others, they feel very real to the person with paranoia. They truly believe that they are in danger.\nParanoia is different from phobias. In a phobia, someone has an irrational fear, but does not blame anyone for this fear. A paranoid person will often make false accusations and say that something was intentional, when it was just coincidence or an accident.\nIf a person is truly paranoid, their fears must not be explained by common beliefs, like their religion. For example, some religions say that people can use magic to hurt others. So a person from one of those religions should not be diagnosed as paranoid just because he/she has this belief. They would also have to have other paranoid beliefs - which could not be explained by religious beliefs - to be diagnosed with paranoia.\nVery often, people with paranoia also have other thought disorders, or mood disorders. Paranoia can be a symptom of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and other mental illnesses. \nIn everyday talk, people may use \"paranoid\" to mean more normal worries. For example, someone may call a friend paranoid for thinking that his teacher hates him.\nReferences.\nFor example Nimra"}
{"id": "21131", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21131", "title": "Delusion", "text": "A delusion is a false belief held by a person. If doctors talk about delusions they mean that the false belief is the result of some disease, usually a disease of the mind, such as \"paranoia\", \"schizophrenia\" or \"bipolar disorder, but not always neccesarily, delusions can come in many different forms such as political differences, economic differences such as a god complex upheld by someone who believes they are all powerful and many other types.\"\nDelusions also have other properties, according to Karl Jaspers:\nStudies on psychiatric patients show that delusions vary in intensity and conviction over time, which suggests that certainty and incorrigibility are not necessary components of a delusional belief.\nDelusions do not necessarily have to be false or 'incorrect inferences about external reality'. Some religious or spiritual beliefs by their nature may not be falsifiable, and hence cannot be described as false or incorrect, no matter whether the person holding these beliefs was diagnosed as delusional or not.\nA doctor or psychiatrist may say that a delusion is false, because it \"seems\" to be unlikely or bizarre.Psychiatrists rarely have the time or resources to check the validity of a person\u2019s claims; this means that some true beliefs are erroneously classified as delusional. This is known as the Martha Mitchell effect, after the wife of the attorney general who alleged that illegal activity was taking place in the White House. At the time her claims were thought to be signs of mental illness. Only after the Watergate scandal was she proved right, and sane.\nTreating delusions is difficult, but in some cases antypsychotics can be used. If the delusions pose a risk to the health of the patient (if consented) or the health of others, people may also be treated against their will. "}
{"id": "21132", "revid": "7856260", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21132", "title": "Paganism", "text": "Paganism is a term that covers a great number of spiritual and religious beliefs, and someone who follows one of these beliefs is known as a Pagan. Some of those in ancient times, who are called \"Pagans\" today, believed there was not just one god but a number of gods and goddesses. The stories from Greek mythology are famous examples from a pagan religion. Pagans usually focus on spirituality and nature, rather than on doctrines and dogma. Not all pagans are polytheists (belief in more than one god). Some of them are monotheists (belief in only one god).\nThe word \"pagan\" (without a capital P) is often used to describe anyone who holds religious beliefs that differ from the main world religions. A similar term is \"heathen\". Today Pagan, with a capital P, often refers to people who follow Neo-Pagan religions that honour the Earth. The best known Neo-Pagan religion is Wicca. Another well-known neo-pagan faith is Druidism, but there are many other Neo-Pagan religions with different beliefs.\nSurviving religions of earlier cultures.\nEnough has survived of the ancient religions of cultures from pre-modern Africa, South America, New Guinea and Japan to give us quite a clear picture. Since African slaves were taken to both South America and the United States, it is no surprise that their beliefs and practices still survive. Not, of course, as the dominant religion, but they do survive.\nIn a similar way, but much less well documented, are the ancient religions of other groups such as the Ainu in Japan, the tribes in New Guinea, the many tribes in Amazonia, and the fractured remnants of traditional religions in African countries.\nAll these groups have one thing in common: they are not part of farming revolution which happened in the Middle East, and which spread quickly to Eurasia. The religions which started there are called the \"religions of the book\" because their original beliefs were written down. Of course, writing was one of the original inventions of a settled people, one able to invest time and energy into activities which would be far more difficult for more traditional peoples."}
{"id": "21134", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21134", "title": "Color blind", "text": ""}
{"id": "21135", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21135", "title": "Colour blindness", "text": ""}
{"id": "21136", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21136", "title": "1578", "text": "Year 1578 (MDLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar."}
{"id": "21137", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21137", "title": "1504", "text": "1504 was a year of the Gregorian calendar, that started on a Friday."}
{"id": "21138", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21138", "title": "1726", "text": ""}
{"id": "21141", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21141", "title": "Oriental Greenfinch", "text": ""}
{"id": "21144", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21144", "title": "Courage", "text": "A person has courage if they do something even though they are afraid. Courage can be doing things that other people think should be scary. A person has courage if they put themself in danger to save another person (this is called mental strength). If someone has courage, it is said that they are courageous, standing up for what you believe in (also called moral strength).\nFor example, someone may be said to have courage if they fight a lion, or save a baby from a burning building. \nCourage is the opposite of fear and can also be called bravery."}
{"id": "21147", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21147", "title": "1710s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21148", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21148", "title": "Governments", "text": ""}
{"id": "21154", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21154", "title": "Collision Detection", "text": ""}
{"id": "21155", "revid": "1078549", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21155", "title": "Washington D.C.", "text": ""}
{"id": "21156", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21156", "title": "Norse", "text": ""}
{"id": "21157", "revid": "794806", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21157", "title": "Fan (person)", "text": "A fan or fanatic is someone who like a thing, a person, or an idea. Things that fans might like are hobbies, sports (often a team), music, a kind of movie or book, or almost anything. There are lots of kinds of fans, including science fiction fans and fans of popular music stars, like The Beatles. Fans will meet with each other to talk about and share their interest, often in large groups called conventions.\nThe word \"fanatic\" can also be used to talk about people who care a lot about politics, religion or their own group of people. Some fanatics can hurt other people whom they dislike, or who disagree with them.\nIn British English, supporter is their word for a person who likes and supports a sportsperson or a team. Many teams of some sports have thousands of supporters, for example, the football team Real Madrid. In American English, supporter is more often used to talk about people in politics. Supporters of a politician, a political party, or an idea such as a particular law may like their subject very much, but usually are not violent."}
{"id": "21161", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21161", "title": "Formula 1", "text": "Formula 1 is a type of motorsport. Teams compete in a series of Grand Prix races, held in different countries around the world. Some of the most popular races are held in Monaco, Japan, Italy and Britain. The cars are very fast, reaching speeds of up to 350 kilometers per hour (220 miles per hour). The championship has been won many times by different teams like McLaren, Ferrari and Williams. Teams can consist of as many as 600 people, who all come together every race weekend, and using each of their individual expertise try to obtain the best result - a victory. The winning driver and team each get twenty-five points towards the Drivers' and Constructors' Championship. Teams consist of drivers, test drivers, a team principal, mechanics, engineers, and designers. Winning a race takes a good qualifying position, flawless strategy, perfect pitstops and a fast car. If you get the most poles (first place) then you get a trophy. This was added in 2014.\nDrivers are paid huge salaries and money to risk their lives every time they step into the cockpit of the F1 car. Like all types of motor racing, the dangers associated with Formula One are great. Therefore, there are many safety measures. Drivers wear 4 layers of flameproof overalls, made of a fire resistant material called Nomex. A drivers helmet must be able to resist an 800 degree Celsius flame for at least 45 seconds, as well as big G forces. The helmets are so strong that they can be driven over by trucks with no damage being done to them. Carbon fibre is the ideal material for the bodywork of Formula One cars, as it is light and strong. Because of this, the cars are very expensive to build and repair. The design of cars differs from team to team. Each team has two entries into the championship, which means two cars to build. The current tyre suppliers are Pirelli - making sure every car has the right tyre for the differing weather conditions. Wet weather driving is considered a skill in Formula One, as the cars are harder to drive. \nThe body that runs Formula One, the FIA, is based in France. Although Formula One is a 'billion dollar business', a drop in viewership and attendance figures at races has prompted the FIA to make a number of rule changes in recent years. These changes are meant to make the races more interesting, so more people watch F1 on television."}
{"id": "21162", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21162", "title": "Abdullah \u00d6calan", "text": "Abdullah \u00d6calan is the leader of Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), an influential socialist organization in Turkey. Turkey branded Abdullah \u00d6calan as a terrorist and has been imprisoned for the rest of his life for terrorist activities in 1999. \"\u00d6calan\" means, in Turkish, \"he who takes revenge\".\nHe was born on April 4, 1949 into a poor peasant family in the village of \u00d6merli, in the district of Halfeti in \u015eanl\u0131urfa Province. He studied at vocational school and then pursued a course at the School of Political Science, Ankara University. He became involved in militant Maoist politics and was first arrested in 1973. In 1975 he went to Syria where he was one of the founder members of the PKK in 1978. At the First Congress in November 1978 he was elected leader.\nAlthough the organization was named the Kurdistan Workers Party, it never became a real political party and it was not registered as one, because it would have been rejected by Turkey which did not agree with its ideology.\nHe left Turkey in 1979, before the military coup of September 1980, which led to the imprisonment of thousands of members and sympathisers of the organization. In 1982 the PKK decided to resume guerrilla warfare inside Turkey and in August 1984 the military wing, the Liberation Units of Kurdistan (HRK), began operations. In 1985 the political wing was renamed the National Liberation Front of Kurdistan (ERNK) and in 1986 the HRK became the Peoples Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK). \u00d6calan's pronouncements had become increasingly moderate through the 1990s, publicly he stated his desire to move the PKK away from violence and towards a political approach.\nHe was forced out of his group's base in Syria, following pressure from Turkey, in November 1998. He fled to Russia and then Europe, he was arrested after arriving from Moscow at Rome's Fiumicino Airport. He was soon released while he appealed for political asylum, Italian law forbids the extradition of someone to a country where they would face a death sentence. An extradition request from Germany also collapsed amid political maneuvering. He left Italy on January 16, 1999 and returned to Russia but soon left for Greece, apparently intending to fly from there to The Hague. He was refused entry to a number of European states and instead, on February 3 the Greek authorities flew him to Nairobi, Kenya.\nImprisoned in Turkey.\nOn February 15, 1999 Turkey succeeded in kidnapping or arresting him in Nairobi and quickly transported him to Turkey. The details of his capture remain unclear. On February 16, across Europe, Kurdish supporters responded with protests, acts of violence and terrorism. \u00d6calan was charged with treason in Ankara, Turkey on February 23.\n\u00d6calan was held as the only inmate on the prison island of Imrali. He was tried before a military court on the island from May 31, 1999. The trial had six days of proceedings and he was sentenced to death on June 29. His appeal was rejected in November but the sentence was suspended while there was a review by the European Court of Human Rights. In September 2002 a Turkish court finally reduced his sentence to life imprisonment. The country had abandoned the death penalty in August 2002 as part of the process towards joining the European Union.\nSince he was put in prison, \u00d6calan has had much more time to read and write. He has changed many of his views, and wants more peaceful solutions instead of violence. One of the authors who influenced \u00d6calan's changed thinking was Murray Bookchin, an American writer whose idea of \"Libertarian municipalism\" would lead \u00d6calan to develop "}
{"id": "21163", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21163", "title": "Caribbean Community", "text": "The Caribbean Community , or CARICOM, is a group of nations in the Caribbean Sea that have come together founded on 4 July 1973. They share their products, and they have a government to help organize the area. They are mainly together to help trade and their economies.\nThe full members are:"}
{"id": "21167", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21167", "title": "1747", "text": ""}
{"id": "21168", "revid": "1021325", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21168", "title": "1762", "text": ""}
{"id": "21169", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21169", "title": "1620", "text": ""}
{"id": "21170", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21170", "title": "1520", "text": ""}
{"id": "21172", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21172", "title": "List of towns in Greenland", "text": "This is a list of the towns in Greenland that have over 1,000 people living in them (the first name is in Greenlandic, the second is in Danish):"}
{"id": "21173", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21173", "title": "Qaqortoq", "text": "Qaqortoq, also known by its Danish name \"Julianeh\u00e5b\", is a town in southwestern Greenland. With a population of 3,100, it is South Greenland's biggest town. It is the fourth biggest town in Greenland. The name Qaqortoq is Western Greenlandic, and it means \"white\". Qaqortoq also is the seat of the municipality of Qaqortoq which apart from the town itself includes three small settlements. Qaqortoq was founded by Norwegian Anders Olsen in 1775. Near Qaqortoq are the Hvalsey ruins, the most famous Norse ruins in Greenland.\nReferences.\n\"Greenland and the Arctic\". By Etain O'Carroll and Mark Elliott. Lonely Planet 2005. ."}
{"id": "21174", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21174", "title": "Sisimiut", "text": "Sisimiut (also known by its Danish name 'Holsteinsborg') is a town in southwestern Greenland. With 5,247 people (as of 2005), it is the second biggest town in Greenland. It is 75 kilometers north of the Arctic Circle, and is Greenland's most northern year-round port which has no ice. "}
{"id": "21176", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21176", "title": "Arctic Circle", "text": "The Arctic Circle is one of the five major circles of latitude (imaginary lines around the Earth) that are often marked on maps of the Earth. This is the parallel of latitude that (in 2000) runs 66\u00b0 33' 39\" north of the Equator.\nThe Arctic Circle is one way to say what part of the Earth is in the Arctic. The North Pole is in the center of the Arctic Circle.\nCountries which are partly within the Arctic Circle are:\nThe position of the Arctic Circle is not fixed. It directly depends on the Earth's axial tilt. The axial tilt fluctuates within a margin of 2\u00b0 over a 40,000-year period, mostly due to tidal forces from the orbit of the Moon. The tilt is currently diminishing, so the Arctic Circle is drifting northwards at a speed of about per year."}
{"id": "21177", "revid": "7812998", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21177", "title": "Kabul", "text": "Kabul is the capital and largest city of Afghanistan. \nAccording to a 2012 estimate, the population of the city was around 3,289,000. Ths includes Tajiks, Pashtuns, Hazaras and some other smaller ethnic groups. It is the 64th largest and the 5th fastest growing city in the world.\nIt is 1,800 meters, or 5,900 feet above-sea-level. Kabul is over 3,500 years old.\nDistricts.\nThe city of Kabul is inside Kabul District - a district of Kabul Province. The city is also a municipality (\"sh\u0101rw\u0101li\") - because it is also capital of a province; That municipality is divided into 22 administrative districts called municipal districts or city districts (\"n\u0101hia\"); These districts (are the same, or) coincide with the official Police Districts (PD)."}
{"id": "21178", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21178", "title": "Parfait", "text": "Parfait is a type of food that is eaten as a dessert. It is a French word that means \"perfect\". \nStyles of Parfait.\nParfaits are made differently in different countries.\nFrench Parfait.\nA common parfait is the French kind. A French parfait mixes sugar, whip cream, an egg yolk, sauce, cold fruit and frozen ice cream. French parfaits are usually served on a plate not in a glass.\nJapanese Parfait.\nJapanese parfait made mainly of ice cream and fruit with a sweet ingredient. It is served in a tall glass. It is a classic on a coffee shop menu. It is one of the more popular desserts."}
{"id": "21179", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21179", "title": "Parrot", "text": "Parrots are birds of the order Psittaciformes. There are about 372 species in 86 genera. They are found in most tropical and subtropical regions. The greatest diversity of parrots is found in South America and Australasia.\nParrots are intelligent birds. They have relatively large brains, they can learn, and they can use simple tools. Because some species have the ability to make sounds like human voices and have plumages with bright colors, many species are kept as pets. This includes some endangered and protected species. Parrots are very clever.\nDescription.\nParrots are not very heavy, in relation to their size, and compact body with a large head and a short neck. Their beaks are short, strong and curved. The two parts of the beak are very strong and used to break fruits and seeds. The tongue is large and strong. Most parrots can fly, though many lost their powers of flight after they came to live on oceanic islands. The kakapo is an example.\nThey have strong legs, and clawed zygodactyl feet (with two toes facing forward and two toes facing back) that are very useful to climb up trees. Many parrots are vividly coloured, and some are multi-coloured. The plumage of cockatoos ranges from mostly white to mostly black, with a mobile crest of feathers on the tops of their heads. Most parrots exhibit little or no sexual dimorphism.\nThey form the most variably sized bird order in terms of length. The smallest of the parrots is the pigmy parrot (\"Micropsitta pusio\") with an adult weight of and a length of . With a length (from the top of its head to the tip of its long pointed tail) of about , the hyacinth macaw (\"Anodorhynchus hyacinthinus\") is longer than any other species of parrot, although half that length is tail.\nBehavior.\nThe most important components of most parrots' diets are seeds, fruits like nuts, buds and other plant material. A few species sometimes eat animals and carrion (dead animal carcasses), while the lories and lorikeets are specialised for feeding on floral nectar and soft fruits. Almost all parrots nest in tree hollows, and lay white eggs from which hatch altricial (helpless) young.\nParrots are among the most intelligent birds, as are the crow family: ravens, crows, jays and magpies, and the ability of some species to make sounds like human voices enhances their popularity as pets.\nConservation.\nThe capture of wild parrots for the pet trade, as well as hunting, habitat loss and competition from invasive species, has diminished wild populations, with parrots being subjected to more exploitation than any other group of birds. Measures taken to conserve the habitats of some high-profile species have also protected many of the less charismatic species living in the same ecosystems.\nSome parrots can live up to 80 years. Many parrots can imitate human speech; they can speak simple words if repeated a few times.\nOrigins and evolution.\nTransposons in the genomes of passerines and parrots are similar, but those in the genomes of other birds are not. This is strong evidence that parrots are the sister group of passerines.\nEurope is the origin of the first presumed parrot fossils, which date from about 50 million years ago (mya). The climate there and then was tropical. Several fairly complete skeletons of parrot-like birds have been found in England and Germany. On the whole it seems likely that these are not direct ancestors of the modern parrots, but related lineages which evolved in the northern hemisphere, and which have since died out.\nThe earliest records of modern parrots date to about 23\u201320 mya and are also from Europe. Subsequently, the fossil record\u2014again mainly from Europe\u2014consists of bones clearly recognisable as belonging to parrots of modern type. The southern hemisphere does not have nearly as rich a fossil record for this period as the northern, and contains no known parrot-like remains earlier than the early to middle Miocene, around 20 mya. The first unambiguous parrot fossil (as opposed to a parrot-like one) is found in the Miocene. It is an upper jaw, identical that of modern cockatoos."}
{"id": "21180", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21180", "title": "Angel food cake", "text": "Angel food cake is an example of cake that became popular in the United States in the 19th century. It is also called angel cake. It is very light and fluffy. Because of this, it is named Angel cake because it is said to be \"food for the angels.\"\nAngel food cake needs the egg whites to be whipped until they are stiff, and carefully folded into the other ingredients. For this method of \"leavening\" to work well, it is helpful to have flour that has been made of softer wheat. This causes angel food cake to have a very light texture and taste. Angel food cake should be cut with a serrated knife, as a solid blade tends to compress the cake rather than cut it.\nSome people like to add aromatic spices to angel food cake."}
{"id": "21181", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21181", "title": "Angel Cake", "text": ""}
{"id": "21182", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21182", "title": "Angelfood cake", "text": ""}
{"id": "21184", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21184", "title": "Birds", "text": ""}
{"id": "21187", "revid": "367306", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21187", "title": "Wrench", "text": "A wrench (or spanner) is a tool used to provide grip and turn nuts and bolts, and similarly shaped objects.\nIn British English, \"spanner\" is the standard term. The most common shapes are called \"open-ended spanner\" and \"ring spanner\". The term \"wrench\" is generally used for tools that turn non-fastening devices (e.g. tap wrench and pipe wrench), or may be used for a monkey wrench \u2013 an adjustable spanner.\nWhat a wrench or spanner does is to grip. Pulling or pushing the handle to rotate gives mechanical advantage. It applies torque to turn objects \u2013 usually rotary fasteners, such as nuts and bolts \u2013 or keep them from turning.\nAdjustable wrenches.\nAn adjustable spanner, or adjustable wrench, or crescent wrench in American English, is a tool. It may move its jaw to rotate nuts or bolts of different sizes. It was invented by Edwin Beard Budding (1795\u20131846), who also invented the lawnmower."}
{"id": "21193", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21193", "title": "Salman Rushdie", "text": "Salman Rushdie ( Nastaliq: ; born 19 June 1947) known as \"Mallun Rushdie\" in the Islamic world, is a novelist and essayist. He is the author of \"Midnight's Children\" (1981), which won the Booker Prize. It later won the \"Booker of Bookers\". Rushdie was born in India, but was sent to England to go to private school. He has lived in the United States since 2000.\nSalman Rushdie is well known for writing stories which use \"magic realism\", which is similar to surrealism. This means that things in his stories happen which may be magic or impossible, such as falling from an aeroplane and floating down as gently as paper. He often writes about India, and his stories often are set in different parts of the world.\nFiction.\nIn 1988, Rushdie wrote a book called \"The Satanic Verses\". The book included a fictional story about some characters with a made-up religion. Some people have said that it insults Muhammad, but others disagree. Rushdie said about the story: \"his Prophet was not called Muhammad, lived in a city not called Mecca, and created a religion not (or not quite) called Islam. And he appeared only in the dream sequences of a man being driven insane by his loss of faith.\". Because of this book, a fatwa was issued by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran. It called for Rushdie's execution.\nControversy.\nThe leader of the country of Iran talked on the radio about Rushdie. He said that Rushdie did not believe in Islam and that Rushdie should be executed because he thought the book was bad. This is called a fatwa. In the year 1989, the British government began protecting Rushdie. He says he has always been an atheist, but is still interested in religion.\nRushdie was knighted for services to literature in the Queen's Birthday Honours on 16 June 2007. Many nations with Muslim majorities were not happy with this. Pakistan's Religious Affairs Minister Muhammad Ijaz-ul-Haq said the knighthood was wrong. Then the Prime Minister of Pakistan Benazir Bhutto said this was not the way Pakistan thought. Their fathers Zia-ul-Haq and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto were in Rushdie's novel \"Shame\".\nThe BBC said that \"In 1998, the Iranian Government gave a public commitment it would not carry out the death sentence against Mr Rushdie\", but some people such as \"Iranian hardliners\" don't agree.\nPersonal life.\nHe has been married four times. His last marriage was to actress and model Padma Lakshmi; they divorced in 2007."}
{"id": "21194", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21194", "title": "Executed", "text": ""}
{"id": "21195", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21195", "title": "Lilo &amp; Stitch", "text": "Lilo &amp; Stitch is a 2002 animated movie, released by Walt Disney Pictures and produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation. on June 21, 2002. The 41st animated movie in the Disney animated features canon, it was written by and directed by Chris Sanders and Dean DeBlois. It was the second of three Disney animated movies produced mainly at the Walt Disney Feature Animation Florida studio in Walt Disney World's Disney-MGM Studios in Orlando, Florida. The movie was rated PG for \"mild sci-fi action\". \"Lilo &amp; Stitch\" was nominated for the 2002 Academy Award for Best Animated Feature, which went to Hayao Miyazaki's movie, \"Spirited Away\" which also was released by Walt Disney Pictures and starred Daveigh Chase (in the English version).\nThe movie was so popular that it started a franchise. A direct-to-video sequel, \"Stitch! The Movie\", was made. It launched a television series, ', and a second direct-to-video sequel, ', was released in August 2005. A third and final television sequel, \"Leroy &amp; Stitch\", was released in June 2006 and ended the TV series. Another television series, an anime called \"Stitch!\", aired in Japan from 2008 to 2011, later gaining two post-series specials in 2012 and 2015. A third TV series, a Chinese animated series called \"Stitch &amp; Ai\", began airing in 2017. Both the later two series took out Lilo as a main character, separating Stitch from her and putting him into different countries on Earth where he makes new friends with other human girls and becomes part of their families.\nThe movie was released on VHS and DVD on December 3, 2002. In 2003, a 2-disc DVD version was announced to come out along with \"Alice in Wonderland\" and \"Pocahontas\", which were released in 2004 and 2005. A 2-Disc Special Edition DVD of \"Lilo &amp; Stitch\" was released in the UK on August 22, 2005, along with the UK release of \"\", but a release in the US was affected by many delays. On March 24, 2009, Disney finally released the special edition DVD, which is called a 2-Disc \"Big Wave Edition\". This new DVD has everything that the original DVD had and adds an audio commentary, a 2-hour documentary, more deleted scenes, a number of behind-the-scenes featurettes, and some games. The original DVD is no longer available, with the new one having the same list price.\nPlot.\nAn evil alien scientist named Dr. Jumba Jookiba creates \"Experiment 626\", a creature built to cause chaos and destruction. This is against the law of his planet, and he is arrested. 626 escapes the planet, flying a spaceship to Earth.\nOn Earth, a little human girl named Lilo adopts 626 (thinking he is a dog) and names him \"Stitch\". Lilo lives in Hawaii, a series of islands in the United States of America. Lilo's mother and father have died in a car crash, so her older sister Nani takes care of her.\nStitch at first uses Lilo to avoid being captured by the alien officials, but the they become friends when Lilo teaches Stitch how to be good. She uses music by Elvis Presley in her lessons. Stitch also learns a new phrase: \"'Ohana\" means family. Family means nobody gets left behind, or forgotten.\" Because of this, Stitch decides to go against his original purpose in order to keep his family together. The alien officials manages to find Stitch on Earth and prepare take him away, but they decide to let Stitch stay with Lilo in Hawaii after she explains that she legally purchased Stitch. Jumba and Pleakley become members of Nani, Lilo, and Stitch's family, and the movie ends with various footage and pictures of Stitch and his new family's life together.\nProduction.\nAn animated scene that had to be changed due to the September 11, 2001 attacks was where Stitch hijacks a Tsunami Air Boeing 747-400 and follows Gantu to the city of Honolulu. Stitch is the launched out of Tsunami Air Boeing 747-400 and lands on Gantu\u2019s ship but he is blown off and lands on the road. Gantu is able to find Stitch by using his computer. He tries to shoot the alien but misses. A truck comes close to Stitch and he commandeers it. Stitch drives over a volcano and dumps the fuel into it. This shoots Stitch up like a rocket and he lands on Gantu\u2019s ship. Crashes through the windshield into the cockpit, Furiously trying to pound Stitch with his fist, Grabs Gantu's hand. and throws him through the windshield onto the wing of Tsunami Air Boeing 747-400 below, Gantu tries to shoot Stitch, Stitch breaks the capsule with his head and takes Lilo out. Lilo kisses Stitch\u2019s nose as he jumps off, When Stitch saves Lilo and they jump back onto Tsunami Air Boeing 747-400 and destroy Gantu's ship. The Tsunami Air Boeing 747-400 then crashes into the ocean near David on his surfboard. Lilo asks if he will give them all rides back to shore In the final movie, Stitch finds Jumba's spaceship and follows Gantu to the mountains and volcanoes.\nReception.\nThe movie opened at #2 with $35,260,212 in its first weekend, less than $500,000 behind the movie \"Minority Report\". In its second week, fell to #3, again behind the Steven Spielberg movie at #2. The movie made $145,794,338 in the United States and Canada, and $127,349,813 internationally, finishing with $273,144,151 in the world.\n\"Lilo &amp; Stitch\" received very positive reviews from critics and movie-goers alike, and it was the most successful Walt Disney Pictures movie after the Disney Renaissance of 1989 to 1999 until \"Bolt\" a few years later. The movie's success at the box office and on DVD led to a franchise, with three direct-to-video and televisions sequels and three television series. The movie has received 139 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes, 119 positive and 20 negative, giving it a positive total rating of 86%.\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack of the movie was released by Walt Disney Records on June 21, 2002.\nIt, along with the movie, has more Elvis Presley songs than any of Elvis' own movies.\nSpin-offs.\nOn August 26, 2003, Disney released a direct-to-video sequel, \"Stitch! The Movie\", which was made as the pilot to a TV series titled \"\". This series ran for 65 episodes between on September 20, 2003 and July 29, 2006. The series carried on where the movie left off and showed Lilo's efforts to capture and re-home Jumba's remaining experiments. This series ended with TV movie \"Leroy &amp; Stitch\", which was released on June 27, 2006.\nOn August 2005, \"\", another direct-to-video sequel to the movie, was released. In this movie, Stitch has a glitch because his molecules were never fully charged (this is different than a deleted opening, \"Stitch's trial\", which was seen on the DVD release of Lilo &amp; Stitch). Lilo wants to win the May Day hula contest like her mother did in the 1970s, but Stitch continues to have problems. Lilo thinks Stitch is not behaving right, until she finds out that Stitch is dying.\nIn March 2008, Disney announced that it is to produce a remade version of \"Lilo &amp; Stitch\", called \"Stitch!\", for the Japanese market. The show, which began in October 2008, features a Japanese girl named Yuna (formerly referred to as Hanako) in place of Lilo, and is set on a fictional island in Okinawa prefecture instead of Hawaii. The series is produced by the Japanese animation house Madhouse LTD.\nOn October 4, 2018, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" reported that Disney would be making a live action remake."}
{"id": "21196", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21196", "title": "Spanner", "text": ""}
{"id": "21204", "revid": "6916513", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21204", "title": "AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs", "text": "AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs is a list of the top one hundred comedy movies in American cinema. The American Film Institute presented it on June 14, 2000."}
{"id": "21206", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21206", "title": "Irish Sea", "text": "The Irish Sea (sometimes called the Manx Sea) is a body of water that separates Ireland and Great Britain. It is known to be one of the most polluted seas in the world including the North Sea and the Mediterranean Sea. The sea is important to regional trade, shipping and fishing. It is a source of power generation in the form of wind power and nuclear plants. Annual traffic between Great Britain and Ireland amounts to over 12 million passengers and of traded goods.\nEconomics.\nIt covers and at its deepest point is deep. In 2008, about of fish were caught. Shell fish made up three quarters of this amount.\nThe Irish Sea has 17 active oil and gas drilling platforms. It is estimated there are about 1.6 billion barrels of oil in the Barryroe oil field alone. \nSealife.\nAt least thirty species of shark can be found in the Irish Sea at different times. These include the basking, thresher, blue, mako and porbeagle sharks. There are about 12 species of Dolphin, porpoise and whales in the Irish Sea. These include the common dolphin, bottlenose dolphin and the harbor porpoise.\nReferences.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "21212", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21212", "title": "Party (disambiguation)", "text": "A party is a social gathering primarily for celebration and recreation. \nParty could also mean an individual person, or group of individuals:\nParti (a foreign spelling) may also mean:\nTechnology.\nin the video game industry:"}
{"id": "21213", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21213", "title": "Hatred", "text": "Hate or hatred is an emotion of very strong dislike for someone or something. It is a desire to avoid, restrict, remove, or destroy that person or thing. It is often thought the opposite of love.\nSigmund Freud said that hatred was a selfish feeling that wishes to get rid of whatever is making that person unhappy. The \"Penguin Dictionary of Psychology\" says that hate is a \"deep, enduring (long-lasting), intense emotion expressing animosity, anger, and hostility towards a person, group, or object.\"\nHatred can often cause the hate crime and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights prohibits inciting hatred by the Article 20."}
{"id": "21225", "revid": "445729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21225", "title": "1270", "text": ""}
{"id": "21230", "revid": "838831", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21230", "title": "Dallas", "text": "Dallas is a large city in the northern part of the U.S. state of Texas. It is a part of a much larger group of cities called the Metroplex, along with important cities like Arlington, Denton, Fort Worth, and Plano. The city is one of the largest in the United States.\nFor many years, the city was known as the city in which President John F. Kennedy was killed, but that is not associated with the city as much anymore.\nSports.\nThe city is home to the Dallas Cowboys, a professional American football team.\nThe city is also home to the Dallas Stars, a hockey team in the NHL, the Texas Rangers, a baseball team in the MLB, and the Dallas Mavericks, a basketball team in the NBA.\nHistory.\nThe city of Dallas was founded in 1841 by John Neely Bryan. Over time, it grew into a large city with many companies. In 1907 Neiman Marcus set up shop , and later in 1915 Southern Methodist University opened. \nOn November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was shot dead. In 2014, ebola virus infected several people in Dallas, killing some. A nurse who got it sued the hospital. On July 7, 2016, five police officers were shot dead.\nClimate.\nDallas has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\" in the Koeppen climate classification).\nPeople.\nDallas has a large Mexican American and African American population."}
{"id": "21231", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21231", "title": "Ilulissat", "text": "Ilulissat (population 4,000) is the third largest city in Greenland. The town is about halfway up the country's west coast, at 69 degrees north latitude, about 200 kilometers north of the Arctic Circle. Illulisat is also known by its Danish name of Jakobshavn (or Jacob's Harbour). In direct translation, Ilulissat is the Greenlandic word for 'The Icebergs'. Ilulissat is Greenland's most popular tourist place, because it is near to the beautiful Ilulissat Ice Fjord - tourism is now the town's main industry. Ilulissat was the birthplace of the great polar explorer Knud Rasmussen, and his childhood home in the center of the town is now a museum dedicated to him.\nHistory.\nInuit villages have been in the area of the ice fjord for at least three thousand years. The abandoned settlement of Sermermiut two kilometers south of the modern town of Ilulissat was once amongst the largest settlements in Greenland, with around 250 residents. The modern town was founded in 1741 by a missionary and a trader of fur, who had built a trading lodge in the area. \nIlulissat ice fjord.\nThe Ilulissat fjord goes west 40 kilometers from the Greenland icecap to Disko Bay, close to Ilulissat town. At its eastern end is the Jakobshavn Isbrae Glacier, the most productive glacier in the Northern Hemisphere. The glacier flows at a rate of 20-35 metres per day, resulting in around 20 billion tons of icebergs breaking off and leaving the fjord every year. On breaking up the icebergs come out into the open sea and at first, they travel north with ocean currents. Soon, they start turning south and they go into the Atlantic Ocean. \nThe Ilulissat Icefjord was made a United Nations World Heritage Site in 2004.\nTransportation.\nAir Greenland has air services to Ilulissat."}
{"id": "21232", "revid": "7888658", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21232", "title": "Pan (genus)", "text": "The genus Pan is made up of two living species: the chimpanzee and the bonobo. Taxonomically, these two ape species are called panins; however, both species are more commonly called chimpanzees or chimps. Together with gorillas, orangutans and humans, they are part of the family Hominidae.\nHabitat.\nThe common chimpanzee lives in West and Central Africa. The bonobo lives in the rain forests of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The two species are on opposite sides of the Congo River.\nLife and description.\nChimpanzees mainly eat fruit, leaves, flowers, seeds, bark, honey, insects, bird eggs, and meat. They spend a lot of time with other chimpanzees from their group, acting up, playing, and chatting. Sometimes they will groom each other; combing and looking through each other's thick fur; picking out the dirt and insects. Grooming helps chimps feel comfortable and friendly.\nChimpanzees can walk on two feet, but they prefer to move about on all four legs. On the ground, they walk on their hind feet and knuckles. They have hands that look like human hands, but their thumbs are shorter than those of humans. At night, chimpanzees sleep in nests that they make on tree branches. They bend twigs and tuck in leaves to make a soft platform to rest in a place that is safe from enemies on the ground. The gestation period of chimpanzees lasts between six and eight months. Usually only one offspring is produced; they rarely have twins. Chimpanzees live up to 60 years in the wild.\nJane Goodall has studied chimpanzees since 1960. She observed how chimpanzees use tools in several ways. They will pick up rocks to crack nuts for a meal. They also strip down twigs and stick them into a termite mound to collect a tasty snack. Some have been known to make a sponge from leaves in order to hold more drinking water. The chimp chews leaves to soften them up, dips them in rainwater, and then squeezes the water into its mouth. Chimpanzees are also known to think ahead and solve problems.\nChimpanzee aggression.\nThe behavior described in this section refers to the common chimpanzee. At present there is no evidence that the bonobo has a similar level of aggressive behavior.\nAttacking monkeys.\nChimpanzees attack \"Colobus\" monkeys by working as a team to corner them in the high branches of the trees. Then they tear the monkey apart and eat it. It is thought the main benefit is that meat is a more rich source of nutrition than their usual vegetarian diet.\nAttacking other chimpanzee groups.\nIf they can, male chimpanzees try to kill the male members of neighboring groups. Males work together when they spot a chance to make a lightning raid on an isolated male from the other group. They kill him. In Gombe, Tanzania, a group in the 1970s was seen to kill seven of their neighbors one by one, until all were gone. It can take years for this to happen but, when it does, the remaining females and the neighboring territory are added to the now larger group. Attacks like this are carefully planned, done only when success is likely, and carried out in silence.\nThe advantage for the males that triumph is to breed more children. Their tribe also holds a larger territory, and so has access to more food. Several authors have drawn a connection between this behaviour and the origins of human warfare.\nScientists from the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology studied chimpanzees in Ta\u00ef National Park in C\u00f4te d\u2019Ivoire. The project followed four groups of chimpanzees for twenty years. They found that female chimpanzees patrolled territory and fought with chimpanzees from other groups too, not just males. The scientists wondered if human beings have been imagining that male chimpanzees do all the fighting because we think of human warfare being done mostly by men.\nCommunication.\nChimpanzees show their emotions with their faces and sounds. They make hooting sounds to express the discovery of food, and the face of a chimpanzee with a scowling face and lips pressed is to express annoyance. This means the chimpanzee may attack. Or, the chimpanzee may bare its teeth to express that it is afraid or that a more dominant chimp is approaching.p74/5\nRelationship with humans.\nAccording to a genome study done by the Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium, humans share either 96% or 95% of their DNA with chimpanzees. However, this applies only to single nucleotide polymorphisms, that is, changes in \"single\" base pairs only. The full picture is rather different.\n24% of the chimpanzee genome does not align with the human genome, and so cannot be directly compared. There are 3% further alignment gaps, 1.23% SNP differences, and 2.7% copy number variations totaling at least 30% differences between chimpanzee and \"Homo sapiens\" genomes. On the other hand, 30% of all human proteins are identical in sequence to the corresponding chimpanzee proteins."}
{"id": "21235", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21235", "title": "Meridian", "text": "A meridian is an imaginary line of longitude drawn along the surface of the earth from the North Pole to the South Pole. \nGeographers today measure these lines from what they call the Prime Meridian. It is the line of longitude that goes through the Royal Greenwich Observatory in Greenwich, England. They decided this at the 1884 \"International Meridian Conference\".\nMeridians, as lines of longitude, are measured in degrees. The Prime Meridian, as the starting point, is 0 (zero) degrees. Lines west of the Prime Meridian are either called \"west\", as in \"the longitude of Los Angeles, California is 118 degrees west\", or as a negative number: \"the longitude of Los Angeles, California is -118 degrees\". Going the other direction, east of the Prime Meridian is always said as a positive number: \"The longitude of Mecca is about 40 degrees east,\" or just \"The longitude of Mecca is about 40 degrees.\""}
{"id": "21238", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21238", "title": "1700s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21239", "revid": "6964167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21239", "title": "District", "text": "A district is an area or locality. In some places, it is a kind of local government. \nSome of the countries districts are used in are Austria, Belgium, China, England, Germany, Hong Kong, Serbia, Japan, Malaysia, Pakistan, India, Portugal, Switzerland, the United States, and many more.\nIn the South Asian subcontinent, including India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan, the common term for an official or government administration district is Zillah."}
{"id": "21240", "revid": "1076232", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21240", "title": "Literacy", "text": "Literacy means the ability to read and write. Being able to read and write is an important skill in modern societies. Usually, people learn how to read and write at school. People who can read and write are called \"literate\"; those who cannot are called \"illiterate\".\nAccording to UNESCO, illiteracy is not being able to write or read a simple sentence in any language. They estimated that, in 1998, about 16% of the world's population were illiterate. \nIlliteracy is highest amongst the states of the Arabian Peninsula, and in Africa, around the Sahara. In those countries about 30% of men, and 40-50% of women are illiterate, by the UN definition. One of the causes of illiteracy is that someone who can manage to live without being able to read and write often does not have any reason to want to learn to read and write. Cultural factors also play a part, such as having a culture in which the oral tradition (communicating by speaking) is more important than writing. A tribe that mostly herds livestock, for example, may have no need to read or write. \nThere are two different kinds of illiteracy:\nIn English the word literacy has traditionally meant to be well educated. It also meant to be familiar with literature (to know about books). In the late 19th century the word came to include the ability to read and write. It still kept its larger meaning. In modern usage, literacy also means being able to read print, visual, and sound texts. To continue learning students must be literate in more than just reading and writing text.\nReferences.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "21243", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21243", "title": "Isle of Man", "text": "The Isle of Man () is an island in the Irish Sea, off the coast of Great Britain (of which it is a crown dependency). Douglas is the capital city. It also has a flag with a red background and 3 armoured legs joined together - \"whichever way you throw us, we always land on our feet\".\nIt has a Parliament called Tynwald. It is the longest running parliament in the world.\nGovernment.\nThe Isle of Man is a Crown dependency. Foreign affairs, defence, and \"good government\" are handled by the British government, but in all other matters the island is independent. The Isle of Man Government is the executive and proposes laws to the legislature, Tynwald. Laws passed by Tynwald are given royal approval by the Lieutenant Governor unless the British Minister of Justice says they do not help the good government of the island.\nGeography.\nThe Isle of Man is an island in the Irish Sea, it is northwest of the European continent. It is between the United Kingdom and Ireland. The island is 22\u00a0km wide and 52\u00a0km long, it has a total area of 572\u00a0km\u00b2. The Isle of Man has a total of 160\u00a0km of coastline, it has no important bodies of water. Apart from the island itself, the Isle of Man also includes some nearby islands. The most important of these islands are called Calf of Man, St\u00a0Patrick's Isle and St\u00a0Michael's Isle.\nThe island's terrain is varied, it has mountains in the north and south. A valley is more or less in the center of the island, between the cities of Douglas and Peel. The northern part of the island is very flat. Snaefell is the Isle of Man's highest mountain, it measures 621\u00a0meters above sea level. It is said that you can see Scotland, England, Ireland and Wales from the top of mount Snaefell.\nWeather.\nThe Isle of Man has a usually mild weather. Summers are cool and winters are mild and rainy. Rainfall is similar to that of the other British Isles. Elevated parts of the Isle of Man get more rainfall, especially mount Snaefell. The northern and southern parts of the island are not as rainy as the rest.\nThe island's weather is normally cool. The highest temperature ever registered is 28.9\u00a0\u00b0C, in Ronaldsway. The Isle of Man is not very sunny, but it is less cloudy than other parts of the British Isles; strong winds around the island help keep clouds in constant movement.\nGeology.\nThe geology of Man is notable for the Iapetus Suture, which runs almost unseen right through the rocks of the island. The suture is the remnant of a once huge ocean, the Iapetus Ocean, which was lost about 420\u00a0million years ago as three continents came together.\nEnvironment.\nThe Isle of Man became separated from Ireland and the British Isles about 8500 years ago. The short period of time between the melting of glaciers and the rise of sea level allowed a small number of species to colonize the island by land. The island was heavily deforested in the Middle Ages, which weakened its environment. Some land is now protected by the government to help preserve its wildlife. Curraghs Wildlife Park, in the wetlands, is home to many species of animals and plants. Many bird species live on the island.\nPlant life.\nA lot of the Isle of Man's plant life, or flora, is composed of shrubs (bushes) and other short plants. Several species of grass and moss also live there. Mosses on the island contribute to the formation of peat. There is peat in the island's wet areas. The island has heavily deforested in the Middle Ages. Common trees on the island include ashes, elms, pines, willows, and hawthorns. There are also other trees on the island, as well as many species of flowering plants. Bogs are home to ferns and orchids. \nAnimal life.\nThe Isle of Man is home to many bird and insect species. Many species live in \"curraghs\" (wetlands in the northeast of the island). Curraghs are protected by the Government of the Isle of Man. Curraghs Wildlife Park is in these wetlands, it is both a zoo and a protected area. During the winter, curraghs are the second largest nesting ground of the Hen Herrier in Europe. The Peregrine Falcon, Merlin, European Robin, Willow Warbler, Song Thrush, Dunnock, Swan and a subspecies of Winter Wren possibly native to the island also nest in the curraghs. The Chough is also in the Isle of Man, it is more common than in other parts of Europe. Some farming methods have decreased the bird population of the island. The Northern Lapwing is now rarely found, and the Yellowhammer is now extinct on the island.\n18 species of butterfly and 250 species of moth also live on the Isle of Man. Most of them live in the wetlands during different seasons."}
{"id": "21250", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21250", "title": "French Revolution", "text": "The French Revolution was a revolution in France from 1789 to 1799. A result of the French Revolution was the end of the French monarchy. The revolution began with a meeting of the in Versailles, and ended when Napoleon Bonaparte took power in November 1799.\nBefore 1789, France was ruled by the nobles and the Catholic Church. The ideas of the Enlightenment were beginning to make the ordinary people want more power. They could see that the American Revolution had created a country in which the people had power, instead of a king. The government before the revolution was called the \"\".\nCauses of the revolution.\nMany problems in France led up to the Revolution:\nThe \u2018Estates-General\u2019.\nBefore the Revolution, France was divided into three Estates. The First Estate was the Clergy (the church). It made up 1% of the population. The Second Estate was the Nobles, which also made up 1% of the population. The other nearly 98% of the population was in the Third Estate. Representatives of the people from all three estates together made up the Estates-General.\nIn May 1789, the Estates-General was called by King Louis in order to deal with the money problems of the country. They met at the royal Palace of Versailles. However, the members of the Third Estate were angry. They had made lists of problems they wanted to fix called the Cahiers de Dol\u00e9ance\nThe members of the Third Estate (The commoners) were angry that they were being taxed the most when they were the poorest group of people. They, and the Director-General of Finances, Jacques Necker, thought the Church and the Nobility ought to be taxed more.\nThey also wanted votes in the Estates-General to be more fair. Even though the Third Estate had many more members than the other two Estates, each Estate only had one vote in the Estates-General. The Third Estate thought this could be improved by giving members of the Estates-General a vote each. However, when they talked to the other Estates, they could not agree.\nForming the National Assembly.\nSince the First and Second Estates would not listen, The Third Estate decided to break away and start their own assembly where every member would get a vote. On 10 June 1789, they started the National Assembly. The king tried to stop them by closing the Salle des \u00c9tats meeting room, but they met in an indoor tennis court instead. On June 20, they took the Tennis Court Oath, where they promised to work until they had created a new constitution for France.\nThe storming of the Bastille.\nIn July 1789, after the National Assembly was formed, the nobility and the king was angry with Jacques Necker, the Director-General of Finances, and they fired him. Many Parisians thought that the King was going to shut down the National Assembly. Soon, Paris was filled with riots and looting.\nOn 14 July 1789, the people decided to attack the Bastille prison. The Bastille contained weapons, as well as being a symbol of the power of the nobility and the rule of the king. By the afternoon, the people had broken into the Bastille and released the seven prisoners being held there.\nThe Members of the Third Estate took over Paris. The president of the National Assembly at the time of the Tennis Court Oath, Jean-Sylvain Bailly, became mayor of the city. Jacques Necker was given back his job as Director-General of Finances. Soon, the King visited Paris and wore the red, white and blue (tricolor) ribbons (cockade) that the revolutionaries were wearing. By the end of July, the revolution had spread all over France.\nThe National Assembly.\nThe National Assembly began to make lots of changes. On 4 August, the National Assembly ended the special taxes the Church was collecting, and put a stop to the rights of the Nobility over their people, ending feudalism. On 26 August, the National Assembly published the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which was written by the nobleman Marquis de Lafayette.\nThe National Assembly began to decide how it would be under the new constitution. Many members, especially the nobles, wanted a senate or a second upper house. However, more people voted to keep having just one assembly. The King was given a \"suspensive veto\" over laws, which meant he would only have the power to delay laws being made, not stop them. In October 1789, after being attacked at the Palace of Versailles by a mob of 7,000 women, the King was convinced by Lafayette to move from Paris to the palace in Tuileries.\nThe Assembly began to divide into different political parties. One was made up of those against the revolution, led by the nobleman Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazales and the churchman Jean-Sifrien Maury. This party sat on the right side. A second party was the Royalist democrats (monarchists) which wanted to create a system like the constitutional monarchy of Britain, where the king would still be a part of the government. Jacques Necker was in this party. The third party was the National Party which was centre or centre-left. This included Honor\u00e9 Mirabeau and Lafayette.\nWays The French Church Changed.\nUnder the new government, the Roman Catholic Church would have much less power than they had before. In 1790, all special taxes and powers of the Church were cancelled. All the Church\u2019s property was taken over by the state. On 12 July 1790, the Civil Constitution of the Clergy made all clergy employees of the state and made them take an oath to the new constitution. Many clergy, as well as the Pope, Pius VI, did not like these changes. Revolutionaries killed hundreds for refusing the oath.\nWorking on the Constitution.\nOn 14 July 1790, a year since the storming of the Bastille, thousands of people gathered in the Champs de Mars to celebrate. Charles Maurice de Talleyrand led the crowd in a religious mass. The crowd, including the King and the royal family, took an oath of loyalty to \u201cthe nation, the law, and the king.\u201d However, many nobles were unhappy with the revolution and were leaving the country. They were called \u00e9migr\u00e9s (emigrants).\nAlthough the members of the Estates-General had only been elected for a year, the members of the Assembly had all taken the Tennis Court Oath. They had promised to keep working until they had a constitution and no constitution had been made. It was decided that the members would keep working until they had a constitution.\nThe Assembly continued to work on a constitution and make changes. Nobles could no longer pass their titles to their children. Only the king was allowed to do this. For the first time, trials with juries were held. All trade barriers inside France were ended along with unions, guilds, and workers' groups. Strikes were banned.\nMany people with radical ideas began to form political clubs. The most famous of these was the Jacobin Club, which had left-wing ideas. A right-wing club was the Club Monarchique. In 1791, a law was suggested to prevent noble \"\u00e9migr\u00e9s\" from leaving the country. Mirabeau had been against this law, but he died on 2 April, and by the end of the year, the law was passed.\nRoyal family tries to leave Paris.\nLouis XVI did not like the revolution, but did not want to get help from other countries or run away from France like the \u00e9migr\u00e9s. General Bouille held the same views and wanted to help the king leave Paris. He said that he would give the King and his family help and support in his camp at Montm\u00e9dy. The escape was planned for June 20, 1791.\nDressed as servants, the royal family left Paris. However, their escape was not well planned, and they were arrested at Varennes on the evening of June 21. The royal family was brought back to Paris. The Assembly imprisoned Louis and his wife Marie Antoinette, and suspended the king from his duty.\nCompleting the Constitution.\nAlthough the king had tried to escape, most members of the Assembly still wanted to include the king in their government rather than to have a Republic with no king at all. They agreed to make the king a figurehead, with very little power. The king would have to take an oath to the state. If he did not, or if he created an army to attack France, he would no longer be king.\nSome people, including Jacques Pierre Brissot, did not like this. They thought the king should be completely removed from the throne and the constitution. Brissot made a petition and a huge crowd came to the Champs de Mars to sign it. Republican leaders Georges Danton and Camille Desmoulins came and gave speeches.\nThe National Guard, led by Lafayette, was called in to control the crowd. The mob threw stones at the soldiers who first fired their guns over the heads of the crowd. When the crowd kept throwing stones, Lafayette ordered them to fire at the people. Up to 50 people were killed. After this, the government closed many of the political clubs and newspapers. Many radical left-wing leaders, including Danton and Desmoulins, ran away to England or hid in France.\nFinally the constitution was completed. Louis XVI was put back on the throne and came to take his oath to it. He wrote, \u201cI engage to maintain it at home, to defend it from all attacks from abroad, and to cause its execution by all the means it places at my disposal.\u201d The National Assembly decided that it would stop governing France on 29 September 1791. After that date, the Legislative Assembly would take over.\nThe Legislative Assembly (1791-1792).\nThe new Legislative Assembly met for the first time in October 1791. Under the Constitution of 1791, France was a Constitutional Monarchy. The King shared his rule with the Legislative Assembly, but had the power to stop (veto) laws he did not like. He also had the power to choose ministers.\nThe Legislative Assembly had about 745 members. 260 of them were \u201cFeuillants\u201d, or Constitutional Monarchists. 136 were Girondins and Jacobins, left-wing liberal republicans who did not want a king. The other 345 members were independent, but they voted most often with the left wing.\nThe Legislative Assembly did not agree very well. The King used his veto to stop laws that would sentence \u00e9migr\u00e9s to death. Because so many of the members of the Assembly were left-wing, they did not like this.\nCrisis of Constitution.\nThe people were turning against King Louis XVI. On 10 August 1792, the members of a revolutionary group called the Paris Commune attacked the Tuileries, where the King and Queen were living. The King and Queen were taken prisoner. The Legislative Assembly held an emergency meeting. Even though only a third of the members were there and most of them were Jacobins, they suspended the King from duty.\nWar.\nThe kings and emperors of many foreign countries were worried by the French Revolution. They did not want revolutions in their own countries. On 27 August 1791, Leopold II of the Holy Roman Empire/Austria, Frederick William II of Prussia, and Louis XVI\u2019s brother-in-law, Charles-Philippe wrote the Declaration of Pillnitz. The Declaration asked for Louis XVI to be set free and the National Assembly to be ended. They promised that they would invade France if their requests were ignored. The Declaration was taken very seriously among the revolutionaries.\nWith the Legislative Assembly in place, the problems did not go away. The Girondins wanted war because they wanted to take the revolution to other countries. The King and many of his supporters, the Feuillants, wanted war because they thought it would make the King more popular. Many French were worried that the \u00e9migr\u00e9s would cause trouble in foreign countries against France.\nOn 20 April 1792, the Assembly voted to declare war on Austria (Holy Roman Empire). They planned to invade the Austrian Netherlands, but the revolution had made the army weak. Many soldiers deserted. Soon, Prussia joined on the Austrian side. They both planned to invade. Together, on 25 July, they wrote the Brunswick Manifesto, promising that if the royal family was not hurt, no civilians would be hurt in the invasion. The French believed that this meant the king, Louis XVI, was working with the foreign kings. Prussia invaded France on 1 August, 1792. This first stage of the French Revolutionary Wars continued until 1797.\nSeptember Massacres.\nIn September, things got worse. The Legislative Assembly had almost no power. No single group was controlling Paris or France. The country was being invaded by the Prussian Army. The revolutionaries were very angry and violent. They began to go into prisons and kill people they thought were traitors to France. They hated the priests of the Roman Catholic Church the most, but they also killed many nobles and ordinary people. By 7 September, 1,400 people were dead.\nNational Convention (1792-1795).\nThe Legislative Assembly had lost all its power. France needed a new government. On 20 September 1792, the National Convention was formed. The Convention had both Girondins and radical Jacobins.\nExecution of Louis XVI.\nThe Brunswick Manifesto had made many people suspicious of the king. They thought he was plotting with the Prussian and Austrian rulers to invade France. In January 1793, the National Convention voted and found Louis XVI guilty of \u201cconspiracy against the public liberty and the general safety.\u201d On the twenty-first of January, the King was executed using the guillotine. Marie Antoinette, the Queen, was also executed on the sixteenth of October.\nRevolt in Vend\u00e9e.\nPeople in the area of Vend\u00e9e did not like the revolutionary government. They did not like the rules about the church in the Civil Constitution of the Church (1790) and new taxes put in place in 1793. They also disliked being forced to join the French army. In March, they rose up against the government in a revolt. The war lasted until 1796. Hundreds of thousands of people from Vend\u00e9e (Vendeans) were killed by the Revolutionary French army.\nThe Jacobins Seize Power.\nNow that the king was dead, the National Convention made a new republican constitution that began on 24 June. It was the first one that did not include the king and gave every man in France a vote. However, it never came into power because of the trouble between the Jacobins and Girondins. The war with Austria and Prussia was causing the state to have money problems. Bread was very expensive and many people wanted things to change. In June 1793, the Jacobins began to take power. They wanted to arrest many Girondin members of the National Convention. In July, they became angrier when Charlotte Corday, a Girondin, killed Jean-Paul Marat, a Jacobin.\nBy July, the coup was complete. The Jacobins had taken power. They put in new, radical laws including a new Republican Calendar with new months and new ten-day weeks. They made the army bigger and changed the officers to people who were better soldiers. Over the next few years, this helped the Republican army push back the attacking Austrians, Prussians, British, and Spanish.\nThe Reign of Terror.\nIn July 1793, a Jacobin called Maximilien de Robespierre and eight other leading Jacobins set up the Committee of Public Safety. It was the most powerful group in France. This group and Robespierre were responsible for the Reign of Terror. Robespierre believed that if people were afraid, the revolution would go better. The Reign of Terror lasted from the spring of 1793 to the spring of 1794.\nIt was not only the nobility who died in the Reign of Terror. Anyone who broke the Jacobins' laws, or was even suspected of breaking their laws or working against them, could be arrested and sent to the guillotine, most without a trial. Even powerful people who had been involved in the Jacobin coup were executed. Prisoners were taken from the prisons to \u201cMadame Guillotine\u201d (a nickname for the guillotine) in an open wooden cart called the tumbrel.\nAccording to records, 16,594 people were executed with the guillotine. It is possible that up to 40,000 people died in prison or were killed during the Reign of Terror.\nBy July 1794, people began to turn against Maximilien de Robespierre. He and his Revolutionary Tribunal had killed 1,300 people in six weeks. On 27 July, the National Convention and the Committee of Public Safety turned against him. Robespierre tried to get help from the Convention\u2019s right-wing members, but he failed.\nA day later, Robespierre and many of his supporters in the Paris Commune were sentenced to death by guillotine without any kind of trial. This reaction against Robespierre is called the Thermidorian Reaction.\nNow that the terror was over, the National Convention started to make a new Constitution, called the Constitution of the Year III. On 27 September 1794, the constitution came into effect.\nThe Directory (1795-1799).\nThe new constitution had created the Directoire (Directory), which was the first government of France to be bicameral (split into two houses). The lower house, the parliament, had 500 members. It was called the \"Conseil de Cinq-Cent\" (Council of Five Hundred). The upper house, the senate, had 250 members and was called the \"Conseil des Anciens\" (Council of Elders). There were five directors chosen every year by the \"Conseil des Anciens\" from a list made up by the \"Conseil de Cinq-Cent\". This group was in charge and was called the Directory.\nAlthough the constitution of 1793 had given all men in France a vote, in this constitution only people with a certain amount of property could vote.\nThe Directory was much more conservative than the governments in France since 1789. The people were tired of radical changes and the unstable governments. Things were much more stable under the Directory than they had been before.\nHowever, the Directors were disliked by the people - especially the Jacobins, who wanted a republic, and the royalists, who wanted a new King. France\u2019s money problems did not go away. The Directors ignored elections that did not go the way they wanted. They ignored the constitution in order to do things to control the people. They used the ongoing war and the army to keep their power.\nCoup of 18 Brumaire.\nThe Coup of 18 Brumaire brought General Napoleon Bonaparte to power as First Consul of France and in the view of most historians ended the French Revolution. This bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat overthrew the Directory, replacing it with the French Consulate.\nThe 18 Brumaire marks the end of the Republican part of the French Revolution when Napoleon Bonaparte took the reign."}
{"id": "21252", "revid": "7862296", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21252", "title": "Daffy Duck", "text": "Daffy Duck is a cartoon duck from the Warner Bros. cartoons. He stands on two legs, has a black body, a white ring about his neck, and an orange beak. He first appeared in \"Porky\u00b4s Duck Hunt\" in 1937. In 1946, Daffy had started to change, and Daffy became less looney. Over the years, Daffy Duck had changed from screwball and heckling character to greedy and a jealous character."}
{"id": "21253", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21253", "title": "1650s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21256", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21256", "title": "Guillotine", "text": "The guillotine is a machine used to execute people by decapitation (chopping off their heads). \nA guillotine is made of a heavy blade attached to a rack, which moves up and down on a vertical frame. When the executioner releases the rack, it will fall down and the blade will cut the convict's head off.\nHistory.\nMachines like the guillotine were first invented in the Middle Ages, and were used throughout Europe. For example, Scotland used a machine called the \"Scottish Maiden\".\nSuch machines were seldom used in France, until the French Revolution of 1789. Instead, aristocrats were executed by beheading and ordinary criminals by hanging. The guillotine became the only legal way to execute someone in France. The guillotine was used because it caused a quick death. Everyone, rich or poor, died the same way, no matter what social class. \nThe guillotine was commonly used in France (including France's colonies), Switzerland, Italy, Belgium, Germany, and Austria. It was also used in Sweden. Today, all of these countries have abolished (legally stopped) the death penalty. The guillotine is no longer used.\nThe invention of the guillotine.\nJoseph Guillotin.\nThe guillotine is named after a French medical doctor, . Guillotin was against the death penalty. Realising he could not stop the death penalty, Guillotin instead tried to think of a quicker, less painful way of executing people. On October 10, 1789, he suggested using a machine to do all the executions. \nThe actual guillotine was designed by another doctor, Antoine Louis. Guillotin did not help much with the design, but his name went down in history. Against Guillotin's wishes, the new machine quickly became known as the \"Guillotine\". Guillotin regretted this until death in 1814.\nDesign.\nThe design for a quick, painless, decapitation machine was given to Tobias Schmidt, a German engineer. Schmidt built the first guillotine and tested it, on animals at first, but later on dead humans. It was made of two fourteen-foot uprights joined by a crossbar, whose inside edges were grooved and greased with tallow; the weighted blade was either straight, or curved like an axe. The system was started by a rope and pulley, while the whole construction was set up on a platform. The first execution was in 1792.\nLater use.\nThe guillotine was still the only legal way to execute a person in France until 1979, when France stopped using the death penalty. In Nazi Germany, the guillotine was used to kill prisoners sentenced for serious crimes like murder, treason, or conspiracy against the government. \nA guillotine was last used in West Germany in 1949 and East Germany in 1961. The last person guillotined was the Tunisian murderer Hamida Djandoubi in 1977."}
{"id": "21258", "revid": "2131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21258", "title": "Computer Viruses", "text": ""}
{"id": "21259", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21259", "title": "Viruses", "text": ""}
{"id": "21260", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21260", "title": "Illiteracy", "text": ""}
{"id": "21273", "revid": "224035", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21273", "title": "School uniform", "text": "A school uniform is a standard set of clothing students wear when they go to some schools. It might have a particular color of trousers or skirt, plus a matching shirt and perhaps a jacket or necktie, with matching shoes.\nIn some countries, like Germany, students can wear anything they like when they go to school. In other countries, like England, there is usually a standard dress code in school, usually a set of dressing for girls and one for boys. Boys and girls need to wear \"school uniforms\" when they go to school. In many countries, such as the United States, some schools require wearing a uniform, and some do not.\nOriginally, school uniforms were introduced to hide the social differences between students, but uniforms can also help with safety. Using standard uniforms can also save the money needed to buy extra clothes as fashion to impress other people at school. Uniforms are also thought to improve discipline and school spirit.\nHowever, school uniforms can also help with health and safety by having clothes which have been tested to be safer when worn. Some fabrics can cause skin rashes in some people, while a uniform can be made of comfortable fabrics. Also, loose-fitting clothes can get caught in machinery or playground equipment, which limits what activities children can do safely.\nThere are several types of economic bullying which can be lessened by use of school uniforms. When many students are from families with less money, sometimes students with more money have stood out because they wore newer shoes, where neither shoe was in poor shape. In schools where more students are rich, poorer students have been insulted for the old-style or tattered clothes they wore."}
{"id": "21276", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21276", "title": "Primate", "text": "Primates are an order of mammals. It includes all lemurs, monkeys and apes, including humans. Most primates (but not humans) are mainly or entirely forest dwellers.\nThere are about 400 species of primates. All primates are similar to humans in many ways, but language is an important advantage which only humans have. Other primates have a pattern of calls and gestures, but not language as we know it. \nPrimates have hands with five fingers and flat fingernails (most other animals have claws). All primates are covered with fur (hair), but in humans the body hair is only noticeable in two places: on the head and around the genitals.\nPrimates are split into two groups: Strepsirrhini and Haplorhini. Haplorrhini includes monkeys, tarsiers and apes including humans. Strepsirrhini includes lemurs, lorises, galagos (also called bush babies) and the Aye-Aye.\nPrimates are one of the few eutherian groups which re-evolved colour vision. Colour vision was lost in mammals during the long period when dinosaurs ruled the Earth, and mammals were mainly small nocturnal animals. "}
{"id": "21279", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21279", "title": "Tourist", "text": ""}
{"id": "21280", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21280", "title": "Tourists", "text": ""}
{"id": "21281", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21281", "title": "Tropic of Cancer", "text": "The Tropic of Cancer (\"cancer\" (\u264b) is Latin for crab) is one of the five major circles of latitude (imaginary lines around the Earth) that are often marked on maps of the Earth. This is the parallel of latitude that is 23\u00b0 26' 22\" north of the Equator. At every June Solstice the Sun passes straight overhead on the tropic. This never happens anywhere north of the Tropic of Cancer."}
{"id": "21282", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21282", "title": "Malmoe", "text": ""}
{"id": "21284", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21284", "title": "Equinox", "text": "An equinox is when the sun passes directly over the equator. There are two equinoxes each year. Equinox can also mean either of the two days when this happens. On these days, the nights are equal in length at latitudes L\u00b0 North and L\u00b0 South. The word \"equinox\" comes from two Latin words meaning \"equal\" and \"night\". \nAround the day of the equinox, the length of the day is a little over twelve hours and the length of the night is a little under twelve hours. They are not exactly equal because the sun is not a point in the sky and because the sunlight bends as it comes to earth. The exact day and time when this happens depend on how far away from the equator it is being measured. They occur on or around March 21 and September 21. Solstices fall around June 21st and December 21st at odd intervals.\nThe equinoxes are the beginning of spring, and autumn (or \"fall\" in the US).\nThe time of daylight is quite easy to measure. This was done in many cultures where festivals were celebrated at the equinoxes."}
{"id": "21285", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21285", "title": "Solistice", "text": ""}
{"id": "21286", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21286", "title": "Teufelsbr\u00fccke", "text": "The Teufelsbr\u00fccke (bridge of the devil) is a bridge over the river Reuss in the Swiss canton of Uri.\nFirst bridge.\nThe valley called \"Sch\u00f6llenenschlucht\" is an important access route to the St.Gotthard alpine pass. However, the valley is very narrow, featuring a dangerous river Reuss. \nThe first bridge across the river was built in 1230. This was a wooden bridge. This meant that due to bad weather it had to be replaced often. \nIn the 16th century, it was replaced by a bridge of stone. That stone bridge was heavily damaged in the Napoleonic wars in 1799. Nobody could use the bridge because of the damage. Trade with Italy was done over the alpine pass at Spl\u00fcgen.\nThe first bridge was completely destroyed in a stormy night in 1888.\nSecond bridge.\nOnly in 1820 could the order to build a new bridge be given. The construction of the bridge took 10 years.\nThird bridge.\nIn the middle of the 20th century, the second bridge was no longer able to handle the traffic. A third bridge, featuring two lanes, one for each direction, was built in 1958.\nMyth of the creation of the bridge.\nBuilding the first bridge was very hard. According to a local myth, the first bridge was built by the devil himself. The condition attached was that the devil should get the soul of the first to pass over the bridge. So, when the bridge was finished, people chased a goat over the bridge. Of course, the devil was furious, so he went to pick up a large stone (called \"Teufelsstein\", the devil's stone). He wanted to smash the bridge he just built to pieces. On his way to the ridge however, he encountered an old believing woman with a cross. Scared of the cross, he left the stone, and fled.\nThe devil's stone weighs 2000 tons. 300.000 Swiss Francs were used in 1977 to shift the stone 127 meters to make way for the motorway passing over the St.Gotthard pass.\nPopular belief has it that the moving of the stone was the cause of an increased number of accidents on kilometre 16 on the St. Gotthard road tunnel."}
{"id": "21289", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21289", "title": "Grandparent", "text": "The term grandparent means the parents of a person's father or mother. s have always been important members of a family. The role of a parent is often very different from the role of a grandparent. Parents are the providers and disciplinarians of their children. Grandparents are often much freer to enjoy and have fun with their grandchildren. A grandparent-grandchild relationship is usually much simpler than that of a parent and child.\nThe term 'grandparent' is used for both male and female genders. The male grandparent is called a grandfather. The female grandparent is a grandmother. When looking at the relationship from the point of view of the grandparent, the term grandchild is used. A grandchild is the child of a person's child. It can also be used based on gender. Grandchild is correct for either gender. Grandson is male. Granddaughter is female.\nGrandparents and grandchildren.\nFor example: Bob has a son named Rick. Rick, in turn, has 2 children; a boy (Bill) and a girl (Mary). Bob is the grandfather (male grandparent) of both Bill and Mary. Bill is the grandson (male grandchild) of Bob, and Mary is the granddaughter (female grandchild) of Bob. Rick's mother would be the grandmother (female grandparent) of both Mary and Bill.\nThere are a number of nicknames for a person's grandparents. These include 'grandpa', 'grandpapa', 'papa' and 'pawpa' for a grandfather. Nicknames for grandmothers include 'grandma', 'grammy', 'granny', and 'nanna'. There are also many unique nicknames. An example is American actress Goldie Hawn who did not want to be called 'grandma', instead came up with the nickname 'Glamma.'\nTraditionally, grandparents were highly respected in most cultures. Today many grandparent-grandchild relationships are declining. Much of the modern world does not value older people the way societies did in the past. Also, popular entertainment, especially programs and movies aimed at 'tweens' (children 10 to 12 years old) portray adults as being foolish. This makes the involvement of grandparents more important than ever.\nGreat-grandparents.\nA person's great-grandparent's \"parents\" would be that person's \"great-great-grandparents\". Commonly the prefix \"great-\" is added, one for each additional generation. To avoid having to add several \"greats\" when discussing a direct ancestors, ordinals are commonly used instead. For example, a \"great-great-grandfather\" would be a \"second great-grandfather\". A \"great-great-great-grandfather\" would be a third great-grandfather, and so on. Some sources also use cardinal numbers for numbering greats. For example, a great-great-great-great-great-great-grandmother becomes \"six times great grandmother\". However, sixth great-grandmother would be most commonly used.\nNot counting the individual person in the relationship, a parent is the first generation of the person's ancestors. A grandparent is the second generation (from the individual). A great-grandparent would be the third generation and so a great-great grandparent would be in the fourth generation of ancestors, and so on. Another way of putting it is a person's second great-grandparent is a grandparent's grandparent.\nIn the past, many great-grandparents died long before their great-grandchildren were born. Today, people in many societies are living longer. This means many children get to know at least one of their great-grandparents.\nNuclear family vs close kin.\nThe word 'family' is often used to mean the same as the term Nuclear family. Strictly speaking, a nuclear family is made up of a husband, a wife, and their children. It may also be used to include a stepparent, stepchildren or adopted children. However, the latter family unit is more commonly called a blended family. Close kin however extends the family unit. For example, second cousins are all descendants of one or both great-grandparents. Family units extending to second cousins are considered close kin. So the term includes great-grandparents as well. Third cousins (all those descended from second great-grandparents) are not considered close kin, but just family.\nDistant grandparents and pedigree collapse.\nA person's ancestor tree is a binary tree. It is formed by the person, the parents (2), the grandparents (4), great-grandparents (8), and so on. With each increasing generation of great-grandparents the number doubles. In other words, a person's sixth great grandparents (great-great-great-great-great-great-grandparents) would number 256 or formula_1 (2 to the 8th power). However, the number of individuals in such a tree grows exponentially and will eventually become impossibly high. For example, a single individual alive today would, over 30 generations going back to the High Middle Ages, have about formula_2 generations or just over a billion ancestors. That would be far more than the total world population at the time.\nThis paradox or impossible situation, is explained by having shared ancestors, which is called pedigree collapse. Instead of every person today having a family tree of all unique ancestors, many of these ancestors occupy more than one position in the pedigree. In other words, one's 15th great-grandfather may have been their 15th great-grandfather more than once if the person today is descended from children of both or all of his marriages. So in a typical family tree, the same ancestor may pop up in more than one place in the pedigree. Pedigree collapse is generally caused by close relatives marrying in the past, which was common in many societies. Even today, because most people do not know their ancestry beyond their grandparents, they are inadvertently marrying their own distant cousins. On average, a typical European marriage today is between sixth cousins (those descended from a common sixth great-grandparent). In closed societies the relationship is usually much closer."}
{"id": "21293", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21293", "title": "1630s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21301", "revid": "208594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21301", "title": "Lepton", "text": "Leptons are elementary particles with spin 1/2 (a fermion) that are not affected by strong nuclear force. They are a family of particles that are different from the other known family of fermions, the quarks.\nElectrons are a well-known example that are found in ordinary matter. There are six leptons: the electron, muon, and tau particles and their associated neutrinos. The different varieties of the elementary particles are commonly called \"flavors\", and the neutrinos here are considered to have distinctly different flavor. Of the six leptons, three have electric charge and three do not. The best known charged lepton is the electron (e). The other two charged leptons are the muon (\u00b5) and the tau (\u03c4), which are like electrons but much bigger. The charged leptons are all negative particles, their \"antiparticles\" are positively charged (for example, the antiparticle of the electron, e-, is a positron, e+). \nThe superparticle of a lepton is called a \"slepton.\""}
{"id": "21304", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21304", "title": "Grandmother", "text": ""}
{"id": "21305", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21305", "title": "Grandfather", "text": ""}
{"id": "21306", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21306", "title": "Granddad", "text": ""}
{"id": "21307", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21307", "title": "Grandma", "text": ""}
{"id": "21308", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21308", "title": "Gramma", "text": ""}
{"id": "21309", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21309", "title": "1620s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21310", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21310", "title": "Charmed (TV Show)", "text": ""}
{"id": "21311", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21311", "title": "Granny", "text": ""}
{"id": "21312", "revid": "7386106", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21312", "title": "Jersey", "text": "Jersey is an island in the English Channel off the northwest coast of France. It is a crown dependency of the British monarchy. Jersey is called a \"bailiwick\" because the person who is the head of law for the island is called the \"Bailiff\". The Bailiwick of Jersey also includes the islands of the Minquiers and Ecr\u00e9hous, where nobody lives. The other islands of the Channel Islands belong to the Bailiwick of Guernsey. The country code (also used for internet) is JE.\nOver 106 000 people live on the main island. Thirty per cent of them live in its only town, Saint Helier.\nAlong with English and French, more than two thousand people speak J\u00e8rriais, a local variation of the Norman language.\nPolitics.\nJersey is not a part of the United Kingdom or of the European Union, but the Queen of the UK is the Queen of Jersey as well. It has its own parliament called the \"States of Jersey\" which passes laws for the island.\nThe \"Chief Minister\" of Jersey is in charge of the government. His name is John Le Fondr\u00e9.\nJersey is divided into 12 parishes which elect their own politicians and have control over some roads and the \"Honorary\" (volunteer) police.\nHistory.\nPeople lived in Jersey before the sea rose and made it an island. There are many pre-historic (very old) buildings in Jersey, like La Hougue Bie.\nThe island was part of Normandy, and in 1066, Normandy became part of England. In 1259, the King of England lost Normandy but kept Jersey and Guernsey.\nJersey was invaded by the French in the Battle of Jersey in 1781.\nDuring World War 2, Jersey was controlled by the Nazis. It was freed on 9 May 1945, which is called Liberation Day and is the national day of Jersey.\nGeography.\nJersey is an island. It is in the English Channel, a sea in between France and England. It is 22 kilometres (14 miles) from France and 160 kilometres (100 miles) from England. It is the biggest of the \"Channel Islands\", a group of islands. The other big Channel Island is called Guernsey.\nThe island is around 9 miles from east to west and 5 miles from north to south, so it is often called \"nine-by-five\".\nThe island can have a hot weather in summer and normally has mild weather in winter but sometimes is as cold as -10.3 degrees Celcius. It is sunnier than England, but it rains more as well.\nCulture.\nJersey's culture is a mixture of French and British culture. The people speak English, but the old language is called J\u00e8rriais, which is like French.\nBecause Jersey is an island, fish is a popular food in the island. There is a fish market in the middle of St Helier which sells fresh fish. Jersey is famous for its milk (from Jersey Cows) and its potatoes (called \"Jersey Royals\").\nJersey's newspaper is called the \"Jersey Evening Post\" which has been printed since 1890.\nThere is a musical festival every year called \"the Weekender\" which happens in Trinity.\nThe \"Jersey Eisteddfod\" is a big art, music, drama, language and dance compeition that happens every year. Many islanders take part and are given certificates.\nJersey takes part in the Commonwealth Games and the Island Games (which happened in Jersey in 1997 and 2015). Jersey does not have famous sports teams, so islanders who can play sports really well often play for England or other countries in the UK.\nEconomy.\nJersey has a lot of finance companies who manage people's money. Some call it a tax haven because it has low taxes and many people that use its businesses to pay lower taxes.\nJersey also has a lot of hotels and farms.\nParishes.\nThere are 12 parishes on the island.\nSaint Helier is the capital and main town of Jersey. There are many shops, offices, parks and important buildings.\nSaint Saviour is on the east of Saint Helier. There are lots of houses and many people who live here work in Saint Helier.\nSaint Clement is in the south east of the island. It is the smallest parish in area.\nGrouville is next to Saint Clement. It has a large golf course.\nSaint Martin is north of Grouville. It has a large castle in the village of Gorey called \"Mont Orgeuil Castle\".\nTrinity has lots of farms. Jersey's zoo is in Trinity.\nSaint John is in the north of the island.\nSaint Mary has the smallest number of people than any other parish.\nSaint Ouen is the biggest parish in area. It has Saint Ouen's Bay, a large beach which is good for surfing.\nSaint Peter has the island's airport.\nSaint Brelade has a lovely beach called \"St Brelade's Bay\" and a lighthouse called \"Corbiere Lighthouse\".\nSaint Lawrence is in the middle of the island."}
{"id": "21314", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21314", "title": "D-day", "text": ""}
{"id": "21323", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21323", "title": "East Timor", "text": "The Democratic Republic of East Timor or Timor Leste is a country in Southeast Asia. It is on the eastern side of the island of Timor. It also includes the smaller islands of Atauro and Jaco Island, and a small area, named Oecusse, inside the west side of Timor. Oecusse is an exclave, which means it is separated from the main part of the country by part of another country. That other country is Indonesia.\nThe capital and largest city, Dili, is home to one hundred and fifty thousand people. The next largest city is Baucau. (see List of settlements in East Timor).\nEast Timor gets its name from the Malay word for \"east\", \"timur\".\nIt is a member of the United Nations the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.\nHistory.\nFor a long time, Portugal controlled the East Timor and called it the Colony of Portuguese Timor. In 1975, the Portuguese army left, and East Timor was invaded (taken over) by the Indonesian army in 1975. The invasion was very violent. The army stayed there until 1999, when they gave up control of the territory with the help of the United Nations.\nAt the time, the United States government said it did not know Indonesia was going to invade East Timor. But secret documents, released from 2002 to 2005, show that Henry Kissinger, the Secretary of State of the United States, did know, and supported the invasion.\nWhen it got its independence on 20 May 2002, it became the first country to become independent in the twenty-first century (since the year 2001). In 2006, when Montenegro became independent, East Timor was no longer the newest one.\nSince then, East Timor has not been given much attention in the news. Recently, the Colombian music artist Shakira made a song named \"Timor\", which talks about the country. The attention is because there has been fighting in East Timor between gangs (groups of criminals with guns), security forces (the country's army). Australia, a large nearby country, sent troops in to make peace.\nEast Timor is a small country located between Australia and Indonesia, 3,000 years ago, East Timor was a mountainous island composed of migrant indigenous people from New Guinea, Australia and Melanesia.\nThere were some migrants from Austronesia searching for a new life on this island. Some of the people arrived from South China and North Indochina looking for trade because East Timor had resources which could be exported, like sandalwood, honey, slaves and wax.\nDuring the Second World War, the Japanese occupied the region, encountered strong resistance to their attempts to force the population to grow foods for their troops and export. At the time 30% of the population died.\nOn 25 April 1974, the Portuguese Armed Forces headed by General Ant\u00f3nio de Sp\u00ednola organized a Military Coup against Salazar\u2019s regime called the Revolution of Carnations. After this revolution, Portugal decided to give freedom to the colonized countries.\nGeography.\nEast Timor is the largest of the Lesser Sunda Islands. To the north of the island are the Ombai Strait, Wetar Strait, and the greater Banda Sea. To the south the Timor Sea separates the island from Australia.\nThe country has many mountains. Its highest point is Tatamailau (also known as Mount Ramelau) at . The climate is tropical and generally hot and humid.\nThe Nino Konis Santana National Park is on the eastern tip of the island. The park includes coral reefs, coastal area, and mountains.\nMunicipalities.\nEast Timor is divided into 13 municipalites. These were formerly named districts. The municipalities are divided into administrative posts (former subdistricts), and further subdivided into sucos. The 13 municipalities are:"}
{"id": "21325", "revid": "1070978", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21325", "title": "Country music", "text": "Country music (sometimes called Country &amp; Western) is a form of music that has been enjoyed by people all over the United States for decades. Famous singers from this genre include Johnny Cash, Patsy Cline, the Judds, Dolly Parton, Glen Campbell, George Jones and Tammy Wynette, George Strait, Kenny Rogers, Loretta Lynn, Randy Travis, Tanya Tucker, Willie Nelson, Reba McEntire, Garth Brooks, Toby Keith and Hank 3\nCountry music's strongest appeal is with American rural and small-town populations, but many American cities have a large audience. The music also has listeners in Canada, in England, and worldwide. The popularity of Country comes and goes with each decade. Sometimes a new movie (like \"Midnight Cowboy\" or \"Urban Cowboy\"), hit record (like \"She Believes In Me\" by Kenny Rogers), or new performer (like Randy Travis in the 1980s) raises new interest.\nHistory.\nCountry music has its roots and beginnings in folk music. The old cowboy and pioneer songs of the American frontier were popular in the early twentieth century, and so were arrangements of pop music songs by rural (or rural-sounding) performers. Country musicians also adapted new musical instruments, like the Hawaiian steel guitar.\nModern-day Country music started in the years after World War II. The Sons of the Pioneers and The Carter Family performed old and new songs, in a way that reminded people of singalongs and jamborees of the past. Hank Williams is often called the first songwriter of country music. His songs were easy to learn and remember, and their lyrics said things felt by many people. His music is still performed today. Some of the early rock and roll musicians, like Buddy Holly, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Elvis Presley, began their career as country performers.\nNashville, Tennessee became the center of Country music, much like New Orleans became the center of Jazz. The Grand Ole Opry broadcast performances by The Carter Family and others, and became an important breaking ground in Country music. A television series, \"Hee-Haw\", was a long-running showcase for Country performers, and was hosted by musicians Buck Owens and Roy Clark. When cable television became popular in the United States, The Nashville Network (TNN) and Country Music Television (CMT) brought Country music videos and related programming to nationwide audiences. (In later years, as interests changed, TNN changed its programming. It also changed names, first to \"The National Network\", then to Spike TV, which is its name today.) Country music began in the Southern United States at 1920. And Bob Wills had developed the Western Swing.\nCountry comedy.\nCountry-styled comedy is also popular, with writers and performers like Jeff Foxworthy, Bill Engvall, Larry the Cable Guy, and others. Many comedians have appeared with Country acts, including Andy Griffith, Ray Stevens, and George Lindsey. Lindsey, Lulu Roman and Junior Samples were cast members of \"Hee-Haw\", and so were Grandpa Jones and Minnie Pearl. Homer and Jethro and Pinkard &amp; Bowden were duos of musicians who made parodies of Country and pop songs.\n\"The Beverly Hillbillies\", a CBS television series, included music by Flatt and Scruggs. Members of the cast appeared in character at Country concerts, and on other television shows, to entertain audiences."}
{"id": "21326", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21326", "title": "1690s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21327", "revid": "7614688", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21327", "title": "Tootsie", "text": "Tootsie is a 1982 American romantic comedy-drama movie from Columbia Pictures. It stars Dustin Hoffman as a struggling actor, who dresses as a woman and soon has a role in a soap opera.\nIn 1998 the United States Library of Congress chose the movie to keep in the National Film Registry.\nThe theme song to the movie, \"It Might Be You\", was a Top 40 hit in the U.S., and also hit #1 on the U.S. adult contemporary chart. Stephen Bishop sang the song and the music was by Dave Grusin / Marilyn and Alan Bergman.\nAwards.\nThe movie was nominated for ten Academy Awards. Lange was the only winner, for Best Actress in a Supporting Role.\nThe nominations were:\nThe movie was number two in the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs list in 2000.\nIt was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay."}
{"id": "21333", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21333", "title": "Country &amp; western", "text": ""}
{"id": "21338", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21338", "title": "Lynyrd Skynyrd", "text": "Lynyrd Skynyrd is an American southern rock band from Jacksonville, Florida. Their name comes from one of their school teachers who was named Leonard Skinner. They wrote songs including: \"Sweet Home, Alabama\", \"Simple Man\" and \"Freebird.\" The lead singer's name was Ronnie Van Zant. After Ronnie died, his brother Johnny Van Zant became lead singer.\nPlane crash.\nOn October 20, 1977, the band was on tour flying to Baton Rouge, Louisiana for their next gig, when their 1977 Convair 240 plane ran out of fuel and crashed in a heavily wooded area. Ronnie Van Zant, Steve Gaines, backup singer Cassie Gaines, assistant road manager Dean Kilpatrick and the pilots were killed in the crash. The rest of the band and crew were injured and temporarily split up. They reunited in 1987 with Van Zant's younger brother Johnny as their new singer."}
{"id": "21339", "revid": "1121896", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21339", "title": "Peter Handke", "text": "Peter Handke (born December 6, 1942 in Griffen (Carinthia)) is an Austrian author and translator of books.\nPeter Handke is known for his extremely critical (and perhaps even absurd) plays. Perhaps his best-known play is called \"Publikumsbeschimpfung\" (translates roughly as \"insulting /offending the audience\"). The play consists of actors insulting and offending the audience, and later congratulating them for the good performance. The play has been labelled as \"antitheater\".\nIn 2019, Handke was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature."}
{"id": "21340", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21340", "title": "IDD", "text": "IDD is an abbreviation that could mean:"}
{"id": "21342", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21342", "title": "Density", "text": "Density is a measurement that compares the amount of matter an object has to its volume. An object with much matter in a certain volume has high density. An object with little matter in the same amount of volume has a low density.\nDensity is found by dividing the mass of an object by its volume:\nwhere \"\u03c1\" is the density, \"m\" is the mass, and \"V\" is the volume.\nChanges of density.\nIn general, density can be changed by changing either the pressure or the temperature. Increasing the pressure always increases the density of a material. Increasing the temperature usually lowers the density, but there are exceptions. For example, the density of water increases slightly between its melting point at 0\u00a0\u00b0C and 4\u00a0\u00b0C. When water freezes, it expands by about 9% in volume, making ice that is less dense than liquid water. Water expands as it drops below 4\u00a0\u00b0C.\nMeasures.\nFresh water is often used as a standard of relative density. This is called specific gravity.\nThe most common SI units for density are g/cm3 and kg/m3. When the numerator is much larger than the denominator, that means the substance has a higher density. When the denominator is much larger than the numerator, the substance has a lower density.\nOther uses of the term.\n\"Density\" sometimes means the ratio between other properties instead of mass and volume. Then it means how much of a property can be found in a specific piece of what they are looking at. For example, \"population density\" is how many people live within the same amount of land area. The population density in the city is higher than the country side because people live closer to each other in the city. In computers, \"storage density\" is how much data can fit on a data storage device in relation to its physical size. A Blu-ray disc has a higher storage density than a DVD which has a higher storage density than a CD, even though they all have almost exactly the same volume."}
{"id": "21343", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21343", "title": "Gram", "text": "A gram, or gramme, is a unit of measure in the metric system. It measures mass, or how much matter something is. The symbol is g. One gram used to be defined as the mass of one cubic centimetre of pure water at 3.98 degrees Celsius. Now one gram is defined as 1/1000 of a kilogram. A milligram is 1/1000 of a gram."}
{"id": "21344", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21344", "title": "Dieselectric", "text": ""}
{"id": "21348", "revid": "1135539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21348", "title": "Longitude", "text": "Longitude is a way to say where a place is on the Earth. It is measured starting from an imaginary north-south line called the Prime Meridian. (A meridian is an imaginary line drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole.) Longitude says how far east (positive numbers) or west (negative numbers) of the Prime Meridian any place is.\nLongitude is measured using degrees, the same way an angle is. The Prime Meridian is 0\u00b0 (zero degrees), and the farthest away is +180\u00b0 eastward and -180\u00b0 westward. Unlike latitude, which has the equator as a natural starting position, there is no natural starting position for longitude. Other meridians have been used in the past, but most scientists now agree to use the Prime Meridian.\nFor centuries navigators at sea were seldom able to know their longitude. The problem was solved by making better clocks (chronometers) in the early 19th century.\nUnlike latitude, longitude does not maintain a constant distance between degrees since meridians all come together at the poles and are far apart at the equator. This means people near the North or South Pole can cross many degrees of longitude by travelling a short distance. The time difference between longitudes is 4 minutes per degree. The distance between degrees of longitude is maximum at the equator.\nRelated pages.\nWhat are the lines latitude and longitude"}
{"id": "21354", "revid": "7601080", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21354", "title": "Hilary Duff", "text": "Hilary Erhard Duff (often as Hilary Duff) (Born: September 28, 1987) is an American actress and singer. She got celebrity famous by being in the television program show' Lizzie McGuire she has gone onto a movie career, with roles in mainstream pictures. Among the movies she plays in are \"Cheaper by the Dozen\", \"The Perfect Man\", \"A Cinderella Story\", \"Raise Your Voice\", \"Material Girls\" and independent movies such as \"War, Inc.\" and \"Greta\". Duff has also ventured into a music career as a pop musician, releasing 8 albums (for example \"Most Wanted\", \"Dignity\", \"Metamorphosis\", \"Hilary Duff\") and 15 music videos (for example \"Reach Out\", \"With Love\", \"Stranger\", \"Wake Up\", \"So Yesterday\", \"Come Clean\"). Lately she has also ventured into a fashion career as a designer for DKNY, with her new line \"Femme for DKNY\".\nIn June 2018, Duff and her boyfriend Matthew Koma announced that they are expecting a baby girl."}
{"id": "21356", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21356", "title": "Oil platform", "text": "An oil platform is a large structure placed in the sea. It is used to drill for oil or natural gas at the bottom of the sea. The platform may be attached to the sea floor (stationary)or it might be movable(mobile).\nIn general, oil platforms are located on the continental shelf. As of 2006, drilling for resources up to 8km away from the platform was possible."}
{"id": "21357", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21357", "title": "Continental shelf", "text": " \nA continental shelf is the part of the continent that is under water. The shelf was part of the land during the ice ages in the glacial periods, but under water in the interglacial periods. We are at present in an interglacial period.\nEvery continent is in the sea, like an island. Most of the island is above the water line, and we see it as a continent. Some of it though, is below the water line. Beyond the continental shelf, the bottom goes down to much greater depths.\nThe continental shelf is a shallow ocean. It varies in depth, up to 140 metres deep. It varies greatly in its width. At the leading edge of a moving continental plate there will be little or no shelf. The western edge of the Americas are an example. The shelf on a passive edge of a plate will be wide and shallow. The widest shelf is the Siberian shelf in the Arctic Ocean: it is 1500\u00a0km (930 miles) in width.\nInland seas.\nThere have been, at some periods, shallow seas \"inside\" continents. These are called epicontinental seas. Much of present-day North America was covered by an epicontinental sea called the Sundance Sea during the Jurassic period. In the Cretaceous an even larger area was covered by the Western Interior Seaway.\nEcology.\nContinental seas have the richest life of the oceans, more species and greater numbers than anywhere else. This is because it has both sunlight and nutrients for photosynthesis. This causes microscopic algae and cyanobacteria to bloom, and then animals eat the phytoplankton. Most of the nutrients in the oceans are washed down from the continents by rivers. In particular, the continents are almost the only source for some key elements such as iron. The lack of nutrients away from continents explains why so much of the Pacific Ocean is almost barren of life, and why the shelves are so rich in life.\nTopography.\nThe shelf usually ends at a point of decreasing slope (called the shelf break). The sea floor below the break is the continental slope. The character of the shelf changes dramatically at the shelf break, where the continental slope begins. With a few exceptions, the shelf break is located at a remarkably uniform depth of roughly ; this is likely a hallmark of past ice ages, when sea level was lower than it is now.p43"}
{"id": "21358", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21358", "title": "Mariana Trench", "text": "The Mariana Trench is the deepest known submarine trench. It is also the deepest known location on Earth itself. It lies south and east of the Mariana Islands, and has a depth up to 10,971 m (7 miles). The western end of the trench is near Guam.\nThe trench is about 2,550 kilometres (1,580 miles) long but has a mean width of only 69 kilometres (43 miles).\nChallenger Deep.\nThe deepest part of the trench is known as the Challenger Deep. It is named after the British Royal Navy survey ship \"HMS Challenger\", whose expedition of 1872\u201376 made the first recordings of its depth.\nA 2009 sonar mapping of the Challenger Deep from the \"Kilo Moana\" found a spot with a depth of (6.82 miles). The sonar system has an accuracy of better than 0.2% of water depth. &lt;ref name=\"Daily reports for R/V KILO MOANA\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Scientic Equipment aboard the R/V KILO MOANA\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Water pressure is more than a thousand times as great as at the surface.\nThe Challenger Deep has been reached four times by submersibles, namely the manned bathyscaphe \"Trieste\" on 23 January 1960, the unmanned robotic deep-sea probes \"Kaiko\" (Japanese) in 1995 and \"Nereus\" (U.S.) in 2009, and by James Cameron in the Deepsea Challenger on 26 March, 2012. Cameron was able to film a 3D movie of the bottom of the trench.\nLifeforms.\nThe HMS \"Challenger\" expedition found radiolaria in the two dredged samples taken when the Challenger Deep was first discovered. \nOn their 1960 descent, the crew of the \"Trieste\" noted that the floor consisted of diatomaceous ooze and reported observing \"some type of flatfish, resembling a sole, about 1 foot long and 6 inches across\" lying on the seabed. The report has since been questioned, with suggestions that it may have been a sea cucumber. The video camera on board the \"Kaiko\" probe spotted a sea cucumber, a scale worm and a shrimp at the bottom. At the bottom of the Challenger deep, the \"Nereus\" probe spotted one polychaete worm about an inch long.\nAn analysis of the sediment samples collected by \"Kaiko\" found large numbers of simple organisms at . \nThe overwhelming majority of the organisms collected were simple, soft-shelled foraminifera (432 species according to National Geographic). \nEighty-five percent of the specimens were organic, soft-shelled forams. This is unusual compared to samples of sediment from other deep-sea environments, where the percentage of organic-walled foraminifera ranges from 5% to 20%. As small organisms with hard, calcareous shells have trouble growing at extreme depths because of the high solubility of calcium carbonate in the pressurized water, scientists theorize that the preponderance of soft-shelled organisms in the Challenger Deep may have resulted from survivors of the biosphere present when the Challenger Deep was shallower than it is now.\nTectonic plates.\nThe trench is one of the results of a large boundary where two oceanic tectonic plates have converged (collided).\nAt the boundary, the western edge of the Pacific Plate is subducted beneath the small Mariana Plate. Because the Pacific plate is the largest of all the tectonic plates on Earth, crustal material at its western edge has had up to 170 million years to compact and become very dense; hence its great height-difference relative to the higher-riding Mariana Plate, at the point where the Pacific Plate crust is subducted. This deep area is the Mariana trench proper. The movement of these plates is also responsible for the formation of the Mariana Islands."}
{"id": "21359", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21359", "title": "Mariana Islands", "text": "The Mariana Islands (also the Marianas; up to the early 20th century sometimes called \"Islas de los Ladrones\" meaning \"Islands of Thieves\") are a group of islands made up by the summits of 15 volcanic mountains in the western Pacific Ocean. \nThey are the southern part of a seamount range that goes on for 1,565 miles (2,519 km) from Guam to near Japan. The Marianas are the northernmost islands of a larger island group called Micronesia. The Marianas have a total land area of 396 square miles (1026 km\u00b2) and are composed of two administrative units:\nThe first European to discover the island group was Ferdinand Magellan in 1521. In 1667 Spain formally claimed them, and named them after Spanish queen consort and later regent Mariana of Austria. "}
{"id": "21361", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21361", "title": "Marianas", "text": ""}
{"id": "21362", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21362", "title": "Islas de los Ladrones", "text": ""}
{"id": "21363", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21363", "title": "Islands of Thieves", "text": ""}
{"id": "21364", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21364", "title": "Image scanner", "text": "In computing, an image scanner is a device used to transfer images or text into a computer. There are special models for scanning photo negatives, or to scan books. In the computer, the signal from the scanner is transferred to a digital image. This image can then be edited, printed, etc. All scanners have special parts which are used to take a picture from an object.\nCharge-coupled device or Contact Image Sensor parts take the light from the object and change it into a digital signal. The digital signal is then transferred to the computer memory or is read in the scanner's processor. With some software it can be changed to a compressed digital image, like JPEG or PNG. Text printed or written by hand can be changed to ASCII code by an OCR program.\nTypes.\nThe main types of scanner "}
{"id": "21366", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21366", "title": "Scanner", "text": "Scanner may refer to:"}
{"id": "21368", "revid": "7856651", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21368", "title": "Brassi\u00e8re", "text": "A brassi\u00e8re, commonly called a bra, is an undergarment for women. Its main purpose is to support their breasts, but is sometimes also used for sexual attraction in the form of lingerie. The bra is a nineteenth century invention which took off as a fashion garment in the 20th century.\nBrassi\u00e8re measurement.\nBrassi\u00e8re measurement (also called bust size or bra size) refers to the size of bra a woman wears. Bra sizes were first introduced in the 1910s. The sizes vary from one manufacturer to another. Bra size systems are often used to label off-shelf bras and not custom-made bras.\nThe term \"cup\", in relation to bras, began being used in 1916 when two patents were issued. Cup sizes are given in letters such as A, B, C, D, E, F and G the Further the letter is the bigger the bra needed so for example a C size bra is bigger then an A size bra.\nBra sizes in most countries have a number and a letter (for example, 34B). The number comes from the measurement of the ribcage directly underneath the breasts. The letter is a measure of how much larger the breasts are than the ribcage. This is found by measuring the chest over the breasts (across the nipples) and subtracting the ribcage measurement from the breast measurement, then finding the matching letter of the alphabet. For example, someone with a 3-inch difference between the breast measurement and the ribcage measurement would have a C-cup bra. However, this does not always work, since different manufacturers have differently-sized bras. Many women prefer to find a brand and size that works for them by trial and error."}
{"id": "21369", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21369", "title": "Brassiere", "text": ""}
{"id": "21370", "revid": "212981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21370", "title": "Bra", "text": ""}
{"id": "21372", "revid": "1076232", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21372", "title": "Torture", "text": "Torture is when someone puts another person in pain as a punishment or in order to force them to do or say something. This pain may be physical or psychological. People who have been tortured often suffer from long term physical problems or mental health issues and the person may even die. \nReasons for torture.\nReasons for torture can include punishment, revenge, political re-education, deterrence, and interrogation. Victims or third parties may be forced to take actions against their will. Torture may for the sadistic gratification of those watching the torture.\nTorture for information.\nA common reason for torture is to get information from the victim, for example, to get confessions or the names of accomplices. Information got by torture is unreliable, because people suffering tend to say whatever the questioner wants them to say. Nevertheless, it was used for centuries by all kinds of societies. It was authorised by the Christian Church during the Inquisition from 1252 to 1816.\nIn 1600 Anton Praetorius fought against torture and against the hunting of witches. \nPresent day.\nAlmost all countries agree that torture is a violation of human rights. On 10 December 1948, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). Article 5 states, \"No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment\".\nAmnesty International is the leading non-governmental organisation against the use of torture. It has regularly reported on which countries it thinks still use torture. It says \"Over the last five years, Amnesty has reported torture in at least three quarters of the world - 141 countries\"."}
{"id": "21377", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21377", "title": "1680s", "text": "This is about events of the 1680s.\nFor births and deaths in the 1860s see and ."}
{"id": "21378", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21378", "title": "Cheaper by the Dozen (movie)", "text": "Cheaper by the Dozen refers to two movies based on the book of the same name by Frank Bunker Gilbreth, Jr. and Ernestine Gilbreth Carey:"}
{"id": "21381", "revid": "944", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21381", "title": "Dependencies", "text": ""}
{"id": "21382", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21382", "title": "Dependency", "text": "Dependency has a number of meanings:"}
{"id": "21384", "revid": "1078549", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21384", "title": "Iqaluit", "text": "Iqaluit (Inuktitut: \u1403\u1583\u14d7\u1403\u1466) is the capital of and largest community in Nunavut Territory in Canada. It is the most northerly capital in Canada, and is also Canada's fastest growing community. \nHistory.\nThe name \"\" is Inuktitut word meaning \"place of many fish\". It is built on the mouth of the Sylvia Grinnell River, on Frobisher Bay. English explorer Martin Frobisher sailed into the bay in 1576 and thought he had discovered the Northwest Passage. The settlement was called Frobisher Bay from 1955 until 1987. The weather in there is normally cold."}
{"id": "21387", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21387", "title": "Phasor", "text": "A phasor is a tool in mathematics. It is used to show numbers in a different coordinate system. Certain electronic components have models that can be described more easily by the use of phasors. Inductors add a +90\u00ba \"phase\", while capacitors add -90\u00ba \"phase\". Both elements work on the imaginary axis. Resistors have 0\u00ba \"phase\", and are considered real."}
{"id": "21389", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21389", "title": "Roman Emperor", "text": ""}
{"id": "21390", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21390", "title": "Svalbard", "text": "Svalbard is a group of islands in the Arctic Ocean. It is the most northern part of Norway. It is about halfway between mainland Norway and the North Pole. Spitsbergen is the largest island, followed by Nordaustlandet and Edge\u00f8ya. The islands are governed by the Governor of Svalbard. The government is located at Longyearbyen. Other settlements include research outposts, the Russian mining community of Barentsburg, the research community of Ny-\u00c5lesund and the mining outpost of Sveagruva.\nThe islands were first used as a whaling base in the 17th and 18th centuries. After this, they were abandoned. Coal mining started at the beginning of the 20th century, and several permanent villages were built. The Spitsbergen Treaty of 1920 states that Norway is in control of Svalbard. The 1925 Svalbard Act made Svalbard part of Norway. These treaties also set out rules that economic activities could be done freely and that no military activities can take place. There are only two mining companies, one Norwegian and one Russian. Research and tourism are important industries. There are no roads to connect the settlements. Instead, snowmobiles, aircraft and boats serve as transport. Svalbard Airport in Longyearbyen is the main airport.\nIn summer, the plants grow quickly (one plant every 25-78 days) during the midnight sun. Svalbard is a breeding ground for many seabirds. There are also polar bears, reindeer, and mammals that live in the sea. Seven national parks and 23 nature reserves cover two-thirds of Svalbard. This protects the fragile natural environment. Sixty percent of land is covered by glaciers, and the islands have many mountains and fjords.\nClimate.\nSvalbard's climate is a combination of an Arctic climate (K\u00f6ppen: ET) tempered by the North Atlantic Current. Nordenski\u00f6ld Land is the warmest and wettest part of the archipelago, caused by the convergence of mild and humid air from the south and cold air from the north. Average summer highs are typically while average winter highs are . Svalbard experiences midnight sun from 19 April through 23 August, polar night from 27 October through 14 February and civil polar night from 14 November through 29 January. However, due to shading from mountains, the sun is not visible in Svalbard until around 8 March. Snow typically covers the town from November through March. The warmest temperature ever record in Svalbard was an extraordinary in July 1977 and the coldest was a frigid in March 1986.\nDespite its extreme northerly location, Svalbard has recorded a temperature above freezing in all months. One example was in February 2012, when the mild temperatures had an affect on both people and wildlife. The climate is known to be warming very rapidly. Svalbard has also not recorded a temperature below freezing in July.\nWarm temperatures can occasionally occur in Summer. The most recent warm spell was at the end of July to the beginning of August in 2015, when the mercury hit .\nBjornoya (Bear Island) holds the record for the lowest average annual sunshine total in Europe, at just 595 hours, sunnier than some parts of Scotland. Conversely, Longyearbyen, further to the north-west, receives almost twice as much sunshine as Bjornoya."}
{"id": "21391", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21391", "title": "1670s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21394", "revid": "7610963", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21394", "title": "Margrethe II of Denmark", "text": "Margrethe II (\"Margrethe Alexandrine \u00de\u00f3rhildur Ingrid\") (born 16 April 1940) is the Queen regnant of Denmark. Only very rarely is her name anglicized as Margaret II.\nLife.\nPrincess Margrethe was born at Amalienborg Palace, Copenhagen, to Crown Prince Frederik and Crown Princess Ingrid. She was baptised on 14 May 1940 at the Naval Church in Copenhagen. As King Christian X of Denmark was also the King of Iceland at the time of her birth, the Princess was given an Icelandic name, \"\u00de\u00f3rhildur\" (spelled with the Icelandic thorn character, simplified as \"th\").\nShe studied archaeology at Girton College, Cambridge in 1960-1961. She was also at the London School of Economics in 1965.\nMargrethe was not born to be monarch, even though she was the eldest child of the Crown Prince, later King. At the time of her birth, only males could ascend the throne of Denmark.\nThe act of succession was changed in 1953.\nHer father King Frederik IX died in 1972, and Queen Margrethe II became the first female Danish Sovereign.\nIn 2018, her husband Prince Henrik died of pneumonia in February and her first cousin Princess Elisabeth died in June."}
{"id": "21396", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21396", "title": "Enterprise architecture", "text": "Enterprise architecture is comprehensive framework used to manage and align an organization's business processes, information technology, computer hardware and software, local and wide area networks, people, operations and projects with the organization's overall strategy.\nA strong enterprise architecture process helps to answer basic questions.\nFrameworks.\nThere are numerous enterprise architecture frameworks defined. Here is a list of a few prevalent frameworks:"}
{"id": "21397", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21397", "title": "Mutilation", "text": "Mutilation is when the way a human body looks is permanently changed. This change may be due to an accident, or it may be the result of torture.\nLosing a part of the body (like a hand), or permanent scars (different looking skin after a bad injury heals) on the body, might be a result of mutilation."}
{"id": "21401", "revid": "944", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21401", "title": "Phasors", "text": ""}
{"id": "21405", "revid": "99688", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21405", "title": "Porn", "text": ""}
{"id": "21406", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21406", "title": "Heiner Zieschang", "text": "Heiner Zieschang (born 12 November 1936 in Kiel; died 5 April 2004) was a German mathematician. He was a professor at Ruhr-University Bochum from 1968 till 2002. In 1996 he was made an honorary doctor of the University of Toulouse and in 1997 he was an honorary professor of Moscow State University."}
{"id": "21408", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21408", "title": "Jan Mayen", "text": "Jan Mayen is an island in the Arctic Ocean. It is part of Norway. The island's area is 373\u00a0km\u00b2. A large part of the island is an active volcano, the Beerenberg, which is 2,277m high. Jan Mayen is 600\u00a0km north of Iceland, 500\u00a0km east of Greenland and 1000\u00a0km west of the Norwegian mainland.\nThere is a radio station and a meteorological station on the island. The staff at these stations are the only people living on the island.\nHistory.\nThere are many claims and stories about discovery of the island. Some claims and possible discoveries are as early as the beginning of the 6th century. However, the first discovery that is certain was in 1614. The Dutchman Jan Jacobs May van Schellinkhout visited the island then and it is named for him. His first mate made maps of some of the coast.\nIt is incorrectly assumed that Henry Hudson discovered the island in 1607 and called it \"Hudson's Tutches\" or \"Touches\", but there is no evidence for this. Thereafter it was allegedly seen several times by navigators who claimed its discovery and renamed it. Thus, in 1611 or the following year whalers from Hull named it \"Trinity Island\"; in 1612 Jean Vrolicq, a French whaler, claimed in 1629 that he had discovered the island and called it \"\u00cele de Richelieu;\" and in 1614 English captain John Clarke named it Isabella. \nThe island has very few residents. The Long Range Navigation (Loran-C) base has a staff of 14 and a weather services station has a staff of four. The staff members of both stations live in Olonkinbyen. The island has no native people living on it, but is given the ISO 3166-1 country code SJ, the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) .no (.sj is allocated but not used ) and data code JN. Its amateur radio call sign prefix is JX."}
{"id": "21409", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21409", "title": "Uninhabited", "text": ""}
{"id": "21413", "revid": "1719", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21413", "title": "Garment", "text": ""}
{"id": "21414", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21414", "title": "12 November", "text": ""}
{"id": "21415", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21415", "title": "Gate", "text": "A gate is a place between two parts of a wall, or a fence which could be opened and closed to let people go through it.\nIn the Middle Ages, a city gate also allowed people to go into a (walled) city.\nNowadays, people also talk about \"gates\" at airports. When going on an aircraft, people need to get together in a certain area of the airport first. They then pass through some kind of doorway to get onto the plane. That is what is called \"gate\"."}
{"id": "21416", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21416", "title": "City gate", "text": "A city gate is a gate that is found in many medieval cities. It was the place where people could enter or leave a walled city. Very often, city gates were closed during the night."}
{"id": "21418", "revid": "7792330", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21418", "title": "Bern", "text": "Bern (French: \"Berne\", Italian: \"Berna,\" Romansh: \"Berna\", Bernese German: \"B\u00e4rn\") is the capital city of Switzerland. It is also the capital of the canton of Bern.\nAs of early 2006, 127.000 people live in the city.\nHistory.\nBern was started in 1191 by Berchthold V. von Z\u00e4hringen. A legend says that he said he would name the city after the next animal he caught. So when he caught a bear (German: \"B\u00e4r\") the city was named Bern. Z\u00e4hringen built the city in the half-circle the river Aare makes.\nTraffic.\nPublic streetcars and buses are run by an organization called BernMobil. There are 3 streetcar lines and about 15 bus lines. Most of the lines are in the city but some travel away from the city. There is also the Marzilibahn, a funicular (inclined- or cliff-railway) which goes from the banks of the Aare up to the Federal Building (German: \"Bundeshaus\"). The Marzilibahn is 105 meters long. It is the shortest funicular in Europe. Another funicular, called the Gurtenbahn, goes from the section of Bern called Wabern, which is on the river Aare, up to the top of Gurten, a large hill 585 meters high that is just south of Bern. A small airport, Belpmoos, is located a short distance south of Bern in Belp.\nFolk Festivals.\nZibelem\u00e4rit (onion market).\nEach year, on the 4th Monday in November, there is the Onion Market in Bern, where onions are sold. Many people visit the market in the early morning and throw confetti. They also hit other people with hammers made out of plastic\nAareleuchten (glowing Aare).\nSince 1996, every August 1 (a national holiday in Switzerland) they hold the Aareleuchten. The Aareleuchten is paid for by SwissAid. During the festival, people put small ships with a light in them into the river Aare. All of these small lights make the Aare \"glow.\""}
{"id": "21420", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21420", "title": "Berne", "text": ""}
{"id": "21422", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21422", "title": "Demo (software)", "text": "A demo is a small portion or sample of a product. Usually the product is music, video game, or computer program. Demos are usually given to people who might be interested the product to try it before buying and advertise the product."}
{"id": "21423", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21423", "title": "Preview", "text": "A preview is a small piece of something used to show what the whole is like before it is generally available. Typically, previews exist for movies and possibly video games. They usually are a small portion of video showing what the game or movie is like to advertise it.\nIn software, a preview can be a feature that allows a user to see what a document looks like before the user prints it out, or posts it on a website."}
{"id": "21424", "revid": "1115759", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21424", "title": "Atomic mass", "text": "An atomic mass (symbol: \"m\"a) is the mass of a single atom of a chemical element. It includes the masses of the 3 subatomic particles that make up an atom: protons, neutrons and electrons.\nAtomic mass can be expressed in grams. However, because each atom has a very small mass, this is not very helpful. Instead, atomic mass is expressed in unified atomic mass units (unit symbol: u). 1 atomic mass unit is defined as 1/12 of the mass of a single carbon-12 atom. 1 u has a value of 1.660 539 066 60(50) \u00d7 10\u221227 kg.\nA carbon-12 atom has a mass of 12 u. Because electrons are so light, we can say that the mass of a carbon-12 atom is made of 6 protons and 6 neutrons. Because the masses of protons and neutrons are almost exactly the same, we can say that both protons and neutrons have a mass of roughly 1 u. Hence, we can get a rough value of an atom's mass in atomic mass units by working out the sum of the number of protons and the number of neutrons in the nucleus, which is called the mass number. The atomic mass of an atom is usually within 0.1 u of the mass number.\nThe number of protons an atom has determines what element it is. However, most elements in nature consist of atoms with different numbers of neutrons. An atom of an element with a certain number of neutrons is called an isotope. For example, the element chlorine has two common isotopes: chlorine-35 and chlorine-37. Both isotopes of chlorine have 17 protons, but chlorine-37 has 20 neutrons, 2 more neutrons than chlorine-35, which has 18. Each isotope has its own atomic mass, called its isotopic mass. In the case of chlorine, chlorine-35 has a mass of around 35 u, and chlorine-37 around 37 u.\nAs mentioned above, note that the atomic mass of an atom is not the same as its mass number. The mass number (symbol: A) of an atom is the sum of the number of protons and the number of neutrons in the nucleus. Mass numbers are always whole numbers with no units. Also, \"relative\" isotopic mass is not the same as isotopic mass, and relative atomic mass (also called \"atomic weight\") is not the same as atomic mass.\nA relative isotopic mass is the mass of an isotope relative to 1/12 of the mass of a carbon-12 atom. In other words, a relative isotopic mass tells you the number of times an isotope of an element is heavier than one-twelfth of an atom of carbon-12. The word \"relative\" in relative isotopic mass refers to this scaling relative to carbon-12. Relative isotopic mass is similar to isotopic mass and has exactly the same numerical value as isotopic mass, whenever isotopic mass is expressed in atomic mass units. However, unlike isotopic mass, relative isotopic mass values have no units.\nLike relative isotopic mass, a relative atomic mass (symbol: \"A\"r) is a ratio with no units. A relative atomic mass is the ratio of the average mass per atom of an element from a given sample to 1/12 the mass of a carbon-12 atom. We find the relative atomic mass of a sample of an element by working out the abundance-weighted mean of the relative isotopic masses. For example, to continue the chlorine example from above, if there is 75% of chlorine-35 and 25% of chlorine-37 in a sample of chlorine,"}
{"id": "21425", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21425", "title": "Price", "text": "There are different definitions of price. Perhaps the simplest definition is to say \"price is the value of a product (good) or service\". A price is expressed in other goods, services, or in money.\nHere is an example about price: Peter raises sheep for their wool. Sally raises chickens for their eggs. Winter is coming, so Sally wants to make a warm wool coat.\nShe first measures how much wool she needs for a coat. She thinks she needs the wool from 2 sheep for the coat. She then goes to Peter and asks him what he wants for the wool she needs. Peter then tells her the price he is asking for his wool. Sally might trade some of her chicken eggs for the wool.\nSometimes trading eggs for wool is difficult. So people invented something they called \"money\". This is cash or currency used for trading.\nIf Peter does not need eggs, he will not trade his wool for eggs. The price for his wool \"in eggs\" is zero, but Peter does need something else. So Sally goes to a market and sells some of her eggs for money. Then she goes to Peter and gives him money for the wool. How much money Peter wants for his wool is the price."}
{"id": "21428", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21428", "title": "Doping", "text": "Doping or dope can mean:"}
{"id": "21433", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21433", "title": "1640s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21434", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21434", "title": "1660s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21437", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21437", "title": "Gaza Strip", "text": "The Gaza Strip is a self-governing stretch of land along the Mediterranean. The main city in the Gaza Strip is called Gaza. The strip is currently governed by Hamas, a group declared as terrorists by many western nations for its launching of rockets into Israel.\nThe territory is 41 kilometers (25 mi) long, and from 6 to 12 kilometers (3.7 to 7.5 mi) wide, with a total area of 365 square kilometers (141 sq mi). About 1.8 million Palestinians live on a surface of roughly 360\u00a0km\u00b2, making Gaza the 3rd most densely populated area on Earth.\nHistory.\nGaza was formed in 1967 when Israel moved Jewish settlements and troops into Gaza. Israel controlled the Strip's borders, coastline and airspace until 2005, when it withdrew. An election was held in January 2006, which Hamas won. Since then, Israel has conducted several wars with Hamas due to alleged terrorist acts, causing much of the infrastructure of Gaza to be non functional. It has been placed under an Israeli and U.S.-led international economic and political boycott since 2006."}
{"id": "21439", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21439", "title": "Unemployment", "text": "Unemployment or joblessness is when a person who is of normal working age (usually about 15-18 to about 60-65) does not have a paid job. They therefore do not get paid a salary. It is one of social issues and human rights violations. In some parts of the world, there are social networks to care for the unemployed.\nOverview.\nThe unemployment rate is the number of unemployed people divided by the total population of that age group of a country. The unemployment rate is influenced by many things, including the government of a country to the average age of a country's population. Unemployment is a bad thing for society.\nA certain amount of unemployment is natural. 'Full employment' does not mean no-one is out of work. Governments now aim to increase the number of jobs (which can be done) rather than cut out all unemployment (which cannot be done).\nMost affected group of people.\nPeople with Autism and other mental disabilities are mistreated in the workplace, leading to only around 15% of autistic people being employed at all."}
{"id": "21442", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21442", "title": "Salary", "text": "A salary is a type of payment a person gets for work done for a job. A \"salary\" is usually paid for a fixed period of time, such as a month or a week. Generally, it does not matter how many hours are worked, the salary remains the same. If someone is not a salaried employee, they are generally an \"hourly\" employee and are paid a certain amount for each hour's which is known as \"wages.\""}
{"id": "21444", "revid": "10441", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21444", "title": "Instant noodles", "text": "Instant noodles are a product used in cooking - a type of pre-cooked noodle. These noodles are cooked at the factory and packaged as dried noodles, often with a special powder that adds flavor to the noodles. The dish is prepared very quickly (usually 5 minutes or less), simply by putting the noodles together in hot water and then adding the powder. A kind of noodle soup is then ready to eat.\n\"Instant noodles\" are very popular in Asia, and among many students and poorer people, because they are very cheap to produce and to buy. In the United States, a package of instant noodles sometimes costs only ten cents.\nThere are many companies who manufacture Instant Noodles, some of them being:"}
{"id": "21448", "revid": "1072907", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21448", "title": "Louis Armstrong", "text": "Louis Armstrong (August 4, 1901 \u2013 July 6, 1971) nicknamed Satchmo or Pops was an American jazz trumpeter and singer from New Orleans, Louisiana. He sang the blues and played the trumpet and the cornet. He was famous in many countries. He was also known for his good singing voice and he also encouraged the style of scat to the jazz world. Armstrong won many awards during his career. \nHe died of a heart attack in July 6, 1971 in Corona, Queens, New York City. "}
{"id": "21451", "revid": "17988", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21451", "title": "Bienne", "text": ""}
{"id": "21452", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21452", "title": "Junior high school", "text": ""}
{"id": "21454", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21454", "title": "Elementary school", "text": ""}
{"id": "21468", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21468", "title": "1430s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21469", "revid": "145488", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21469", "title": "Element", "text": "Element can mean:"}
{"id": "21472", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21472", "title": "CBS", "text": "CBS Broadcasting Inc. (CBS) (full name: Columbia Broadcasting System) is an American television network. Along with ABC, NBC and FOX, it is one of the country's four major television networks.\nStations.\nKCBS Los Angeles, California\nWCBS New York, New York\nWBBM Chicago, Illinois"}
{"id": "21483", "revid": "722721", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21483", "title": "Prime Minister of Canada", "text": "The prime minister of Canada () is the head of government and chief executive of Canada. The prime minister is the senior most minister of the cabinet of Canada and directs the executive branch of the federal government, known as the Council of Ministers. The minister is usually always the leader of the majority party in the Canadian Parliament. In 2015, Justin Trudeau became the 23rd prime minister of Canada.\nLiving former prime ministers.\nAs of , there are six living former prime ministers of Canada, the oldest being Jean Chr\u00e9tien (born 1934). The most recent former prime minister to die was John Turner, on September 18, 2020. The living former prime ministers, in order of service, are:"}
{"id": "21485", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21485", "title": "James Knox Polk", "text": ""}
{"id": "21488", "revid": "7623650", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21488", "title": "Magnetism", "text": "Magnetism is a force that attracts (pulls closer) or repels (pushes away) objects that have a magnetic material like iron inside them (\"magnetic objects\"). In simpler words, it is a property of substances which pull closer or repel other objects. It is a subject in physics.\nMagnets.\nMagnetism can be made by a permanent \"magnet\", or by electricity in a wire. This is called an electromagnet. When magnets are put near magnetic objects, the magnet and the object are pulled toward each other. This is called magnetic attraction. Magnets can also repel (push away) other magnets. Most objects that are attracted to magnets have iron in them. This is ferromagnetism. Some metals, such as aluminum, are much more weakly attracted. This is paramagnetism. A few metals are weakly repelled. This is diamagnetism. \nMagnetic fields.\nMagnets have an unseen area around them called a \"magnetic field\". Magnetic objects inside this unseen field are attracted to the magnet. Magnetic things outside the magnetic field are not attracted to the magnet. This is why a magnet must be close to an object to attract it.\nThe poles of two magnets repel or attract each other. Different poles attract each other. For example, if the south pole of one magnet is put near the south pole of another magnet, the magnets will repel each other. This will also happen with two north poles that are put near each other. If a north pole is put near a south pole, the magnets will attract each other until they stick to each other and can be hard to pull apart.\nMagnetic domains.\nMagnetism is caused by electrons (the negative particles in atoms that are also electric charges) spinning. The more a group of electrons spin in the same direction, the stronger the magnetic force. In a magnet, many electrons are spinning in the same direction.\nWe can magnetize a small piece of iron by 'rubbing' it with a magnet. The electrons in the iron get 'spun' by the passing magnet just like a basketball player spinning a basketball.\nUses of magnets.\nMagnets have many uses. One of them was found long ago when explorers found that a magnet could be used as a compass to show the direction of north &amp; south.\nElectromagnets and electromagnetism.\nElectromagnets are another kind of magnet. They only work when electricity is running through them. An electric current makes a magnetic field. If you wrap the wire into a coil, the electrons spin around the coil and make a stronger magnetic domain.\nOften, these magnets work by using a coil of wire that makes a magnetic field when there is a current in it. In addition to this coil of wire, a large piece of metal, usually iron, is placed inside the coil to increase the magnetic field made. Though most large electromagnets employ many solenoids to lift heavy objects, smaller solenoids are used in everyday electronics. For example, they are used to change voltage in a transformer. \nElectromagnets are used to make many things work like computers, televisions and radios and also doorbells.\nElectromagnetic waves.\nElectromagnetic radiation including radio waves and light waves are used for communication including broadcasting and optical fiber, and for many other purposes.\nEarth's magnetic poles.\nNorth magnetic pole.\nThe North Magnetic Pole is the point on the surface of Earth's northern hemisphere where the planet's magnetic field points vertically downwards. There is only one place where this occurs, near to (but distinct from) the Geographic North Pole.\nIts southern hemisphere counterpart is the South Magnetic Pole. Since the Earth's magnetic field is not exactly symmetrical, a line drawn from one to the other does not pass through the geometric centre of the Earth.\nThe North Magnetic Pole moves over time due to magnetic changes in the Earth's core. In 2001, it was near Ellesmere Island in northern Canada at . As of 2015, the pole is thought to have moved east beyond the Canadian Arctic territorial claim to .\nReversals of Earth's magnetic field.\nEarth does change its magnetic poles every million years (plus or minus 200,000 years). Before a change of magnetic field, the Earth's magnetic field becomes weaker and moves around, like a spinning top would before it falls. The Earth has already had hundreds of changes (\"flip flops\"). Scientists know this as a result of studies of magnetism on the sea floor, near the mid-Atlantic ridge. The lava slowly moves out of this crevasse (gap in the sea floor) and then it cools with its iron oxide molecules all pointing in the new direction of the Earth's magnetic field. We can look at the history of this magnetic field today to look back at the many flips in the past. \nReversals occur at intervals from less than 0.1 million years to as much as 50 million years. The most recent geomagnetic reversal, called the Brunhes\u2013Matuyama reversal, occurred about 780,000 years ago. Another global reversal of the Earth's field, called the Laschamp event, occurred during the last ice age (41,000 years ago). However, because of its brief duration it is called an \"excursion\"."}
{"id": "21490", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21490", "title": "Althing", "text": "The Althing () is the national parliament of Iceland. It is the oldest legislature in the world that still exists. It was founded in 930 at Thingvellir (the \"assembly fields\"), which is almost east of Iceland's capital, Reykjav\u00edk. When the Althing was formed, that was the beginning of Iceland as a country.\nIceland is divided into six electoral constituencies. Each constituency elects nine members. Another nine seats are divided between parties based on how many people in the whole country voted for them.\nHistory.\nThe Althing formed around the year 930, about 60 years after humans arrived on the island of Iceland. It started as a meeting of the country's most powerful leaders. They met to make laws and rule on matters of justice. All free men could attend the assemblies, which were usually the main social event of the year. Forming the centre of the meeting place was the \"l\u00f6gberg\" (law rock), a rock where the speaker of the assembly sat. It was his responsibility to say the laws and decisions out loud to the people.\nThe most important group within the Althing was the \"l\u00f6gr\u00e9tta\". It was made up of the country's 36 district leaders, nine other members, and the speaker. This group made the laws and ruled on legal disputes.\nRoyal period.\nAfter the union with Norway in 1264, the speaker was replaced by two administrators called \"l\u00f6gmenn\", who were appointed by the Norwegian king. The \"l\u00f6gr\u00e9tta\" shared legislative power with the king. Laws adopted by the Althing had to be approved by the king, and if the king made a law, it had to be approved by the Althing.\nIn the 14th century, the monarchies of Norway and Denmark were united and Iceland was ruled from Copenhagen. This became an absolute monarchy and the Althing gave up the right to make laws for Iceland. It served only as a court of law until June 1800, when the king dissolved it completely. It was replaced by a High Court of three judges who met in Reykjavik.\nConstitutional period.\nIn July 1843, the king said the Althing could be recreated. Elections were held the year after, and the new parliament met for the first time on 1 July 1845. A constitution was created in 1874. It granted the Althing joint legislative power with the crown in matters relating only to Iceland. It increased the number of members of the Althing to 36: 30 of them were elected and the other six appointed by the king.\nIceland was given home rule in October 1903. In December 1918, Iceland was brought into a personal union with the King of Denmark. It was set so that after 25 years, the country could choose to leave the union. The Althing was given unlimited legislative power. The king no longer had any law-making powers in the country. The number of members of the Althing was increased to 42 in 1920, and to 52 in 1942.\nWomen were given the right to vote in 1915. The first female member of parliament was elected in 1922.\nModern period.\nWhen Denmark was occupied by Germany on 9 April 1940, its union with Iceland was no longer in effect. On the next day, the Althing gave the Icelandic cabinet executive power. It made the prime minister head of state. A year later the Althing appointed a regent to represent the king. This office continued until 1944, when the personal union with the Danish king expired. The modern-day Republic of Iceland was established at a session of the Althing held at Thingvellir on 17 June 1944."}
{"id": "21491", "revid": "141141", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21491", "title": "Blues (disambiguation)", "text": "Blues can mean more than one thing:"}
{"id": "21492", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21492", "title": "Amap\u00e1", "text": "Amap\u00e1 is one of the states of Brazil. It is in the far north, bordering French Guiana in the north. To the east is the Atlantic Ocean, and to the south and west is the Brazilian state Par\u00e1.\nThe state is mostly covered by rainforest. The state is known for producing iron and other metals.\nAmap\u00e1 has only been a Brazilian state since 1988."}
{"id": "21500", "revid": "1124822", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21500", "title": "Fictional character", "text": "A fictional character is a person or animal in a narrative work of art (such as a novel, play, television series, or movie) The character can be completely fictional or based on a real-life person. In that case, the difference between a \"fictional\" and \"real\" character can be made. Coming from the ancient Greek word \u03c7\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03ba\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1, the English word dates from the Restoration, although it became widely used after its appearance in \"Tom Jones\" in 1749. From this, the sense of \"a part played by an actor\" developed. Character, mainly when played by an actor in the theatre or cinema, involves \"the illusion of being a human person.\" In literature, characters guide readers through their stories, helping them to understand plots and ponder themes. Since the end of the 18th century, the phrase \"in character\" has been used to describe an effective impersonation by an actor. Since the 19th century, the art of creating characters, as practiced by actors or writers, has been called characterisation.\nThe word character can also mean \"personality\". We can say that someone has a \"strong character\" meaning a strong, confident personality. It is sometimes used as a noun in this sense: \"He is a real character\" (meaning someone you cannot easily forget).\nA character role in a play means one of the people in the play who have a particular character (personality). They contrast with the main characters of the play. For example, a pair of lovers may be the main characters of the story. The character roles who help the story might be: a wicked step-mother, a kind nurse, an old wise man, a fool, a domestic worker who is very old, a \"Mary Sue\" who is virtually without flaws, and so forth. These may be archtypes."}
{"id": "21505", "revid": "7623884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21505", "title": "Blues", "text": "The blues is a form of music that started in the United States during the start of the 20th century. It was started by former African slaves from spirituals, praise songs, and chants. The first blues songs were called Delta blues. These songs came from the area near the mouth of the Mississippi River. Many African Americans were taken to the north esp. in the northwest of the United States, to find work. They took the blues with them and developed it into new styles. The most important is the Chicago Blues, which is played with electric amplified instruments. But other cities and states have their own form of Blues developed from the Delta Blues (f. e. Texas Blues, West Coast Blues and others).\nChord pattern.\nBlues is based on a simple pattern. \"\u201cBlues is easy to play, but hard to feel\u201d\"-Jimi Hendrix. A common form for the blues is a repeating 12 bar form (each bar has 4 beats). This is put together as 3 phrases or sections, each being 4 bars long. The basic blues only needs 3 chords, one based on the first note of the scale - the tonic chord, one based on the fourth note of the scale - the subdominant chord, and one based on the fifth note of the scale - the dominant chord. The first section or phrase of 4 bars only uses the tonic chord. A common variation is to use the subdominant chord in the second bar. The second phrase has 2 bars (8 beats) of subdominant chord then 2 bars of tonic chord. The third phrase has 1 bar (4 beats) of dominant chord, 1 bar of subdominant chord and finishes with 2 bars of tonic chord.\nIn a scale based on the note C (C is the 1st or tonic, F is the 4th or subdominant, and G is the 5th or dominant), the chord pattern of a 12 bar blues would be like this:\nC C C C |C C C C or F F F F |C C C C |C C C C |\nF F F F |F F F F |C C C C |C C C C |\nG G G G |F F F F |C C C C |C C C C |\nMelodic pattern.\nThe melody of the simplest blues scales are based on the minor pentatonic scale for example C Eflat G A Bflat C, with extra notes (called \"blue notes\") added like this C Eflat Gflat G A Bflat C. Blue notes do not normally fit a scale, but they give the music a special feeling.\nLyric pattern.\nThe lyrics (words) are usually about life, more specifically, the bad things in life. They are simple blues songs that are also based around the form of 3 phrases. The first phrase is set over the first 4 bars of music. The second phrase words are a repetition of the first phrase, this always happens and emphasises the message. The third phrase completes the \"story\" and rhymes (ends with the same sound) as the first line. This verse from Robert Johnson's \"Crossroad Blues\" shows how these phrases work in a song:\n\"I went to the crossroads, fell down on my knees\"\n\"I went to the crossroads, fell down on my knees\"\n\"Asked the Lord above, have mercy now, save poor Bob if you please\"\nBlues influenced music.\nThe blues have made a difference in newer American and Western popular music, such as jazz, bluegrass, rhythm and blues, rock and roll, hip-hop, and country music, as well as common pop songs."}
{"id": "21510", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21510", "title": "Macroeconomics", "text": "Macroeconomics studies large-scale economic decisions. For example, a whole country's economy (or, its economic output) is summarised by the GDP (gross domestic product). Many governments use macroeconomic ideas to decide how much tax to collect and what interest rates should be.\nIt also considers the amount of unemployment, the rate that prices go up (inflation), and the exchange rates of its currency. The exchange rate affects the amount of imports and exports. Exchange rates and taxation are \"levers of the economy\".\nLess dramatic, but also very important, are decisions about government spending inside the country. Such policy decisions are politically controversial due to differing political ideas on government spending. Another factor in macroeconomics is the make-up of the population. A growing population is economically different from a stable population (one which is not growing)."}
{"id": "21513", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21513", "title": "Game theory", "text": "Game theory is the study of how and why people make decisions. (Specifically, it is \"the study of mathematical models of conflict and cooperation between intelligent rational decision-makers\".) It helps people understand parts of science and politics. An alternative term suggested \"as a more descriptive name for the discipline\" is interactive decision theory.\nIn the Cold War period, the strategic decisions of the United States and the Soviet Union were sometimes viewed as an exercise in game theory. In that case the \"players\" being studied were the United States and the Soviet Union.\nGame theory is not just about games, but how and why businesses make decisions, and just about any decision based on valuing likely outcomes. In game theory, all of these situations are \"games\" since the people involved make choices based on how they value the possible outcomes of the choices. This is true even of cases where the decisions of a single person only affect that one person.\nGame theory is found in the financial choices people make, and is found in the study of economics.\nPrisoner's Dilemma.\nOne example is the prisoner's dilemma. It gives an example where co-operation may not be the \"best choice\" in game theory.\nSuppose two people are arrested for a crime, and the police are uncertain which person committed the crime, and which person abetted the crime. Each is given a choice: If each remains silent, they are both soon released. If one betrays the other, the betrayer goes free, and the other is imprisoned for a long time. If each betrays the other, they both are held for a shorter time.\nIf you are a prisoner in this situation and you only care about yourself, the way to get the smallest sentence is to betray the other prisoner. No matter what, you get a shorter sentence when you betray than when you do not. Imagine a situation where you are one of the prisoners, if the other prisoner stays silent and does not betray, then betraying means you do not go to jail at all instead of going to jail for 6 months. If the other prisoner betrays, then betraying lets you go to jail for 2 years instead of 10 years. In short, \"betrayal\" is the best strategy, and is called the \"dominant strategy.\" \nVariations.\nThe prisoner's dilemma does not have same result if some of the details are different. If the prisoners (or countries) can talk with each other and plan for the future, they might both decide to cooperate (not betray) because they hope that will make the other country help them in the future. In game theory, this is called a \"repeated game.\" If the players are altruistic (if they care about each other), they might be okay with going to jail so they can help the other person.\nPhilosophy.\nGame theory has also been used in philosophy. Responding to two papers by W.V.O. Quine from 1960 and 1967, used game theory to develop a philosophical account of convention {norm}. With this, he provided the first analysis of common knowledge and used it to analyze play in coordination games. In addition, he first suggested that it is possible to understand meaning in terms of signaling games. This suggestion has been pursued by several philosophers since Lewis. Edna Ullmann-Margalit (1977) and Bicchieri (2006) developed theories of social norms. They define them as Nash equilibria which arise from transforming a mixed-motive game into a coordination game.\nGame theory has also challenged philosophers to think in terms of interactive Epistemology: what it means for a collective to have common beliefs or knowledge, and what are the consequences of this knowledge for the social outcomes resulting from agents' interactions. Philosophers who have worked in this area include Bicchieri (1989, 1993), Skyrms (1990), and Stalnaker (1999).\nUsing the ethics part of philosophy pursues Thomas Hobbes' project of deriving morality from self-interest. Since games like the Prisoner's dilemma present an apparent conflict between morality and self-interest, explaining why cooperation is required by self-interest is an important part of this project. This general strategy is a component of the general Social contract view in Political philosophy (for examples, see and ).\nOther authors have attempted to use evolutionary game theory to explain the emergence of human attitudes about morality and corresponding animal behaviors. These authors look at several games including the prisoner's dilemma, Stag hunt, and the Nash bargaining game as providing an explanation for the emergence of attitudes about morality (see, e.g., and )."}
{"id": "21515", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21515", "title": "Taj Mahal", "text": "The Taj Mahal is an Islamic religious building, mosque and tomb built in the 17th century by king Shah Jahan in memory of his wife, Mumtaz Mahal. Its chief architect was Ustad Ahmad Lahauri.\nThe building is in the city of Agra, Uttar Pradesh. Widely thought as one of the most beautiful buildings in the world, it is one of India's biggest tourist attractions.\nIt is listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, together with the Agra Fort, 2.5 kilometers away. It was listed as one of the 7 Wonders of the World in 2007. It is located on the south bank of Yamuna river in Agra. It is a splendid monument, but because of pollution, the Taj Mahal is turning yellow. It Is one of the most notable Islamic architectures built by the Mughals in India.\nConstruction.\nThe Taj Mahal is an example of Muslim Architecture \u2013 a mixture of building design influenced from Middle Eastern, Indian, Turkish, and Ottoman architecture.\nThe Taj Mahal was constructed with materials from all over the world, and over 20,000 people were used to move building materials. It is generally thought that Ustad Ahmad Lahauri was in charge of the construction. The construction was finished in 1648. The construction of Taj Mahal is about 6000 feet..\nTours.\nThe Taj Mahal had 2 million visitors in 2001 and in 2014-2017 there are more than 7-8 million visitors."}
{"id": "21516", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21516", "title": "Newspapers", "text": ""}
{"id": "21517", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21517", "title": "Myths", "text": ""}
{"id": "21518", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21518", "title": "Game Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "21521", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21521", "title": "Aryan", "text": "Aryan is the name that an ancient people speaking Indo-Iranic languages gave to themselves. Descendants of the Aryans include speakers of Sanskrit and Avestan which are related to the Indo-European languages. Ancient Persians and Vedic peoples used the name \"Aryan\" to mean nobles. The name \"Iran\" itself means the \"Land of the Aryans\".\nThe Avestan name \"Airiian\u0259m va\u0113\u01f0\u014d\" \"Aryan expanse\", is a reference in the Zoroastrian Avesta (Vendidad, Fargard 1) to the Aryans\u2019 mother country and one of Ahura Mazda's \"sixteen perfect lands\". Other Avestan names are \"airy\u014d.\u0161ayana\", the \u201cAryan people\u201d, and \"airy\u0101 dai\u014b\u02cah\u0101v\u0101\" \u201cthe Aryan lands\u201d. These names were known to old Greek writers as \"Ariana\". Also the Sanskrit name \"\u0100ry\u0101varta\" \"abode of the Aryans\", was a region in north of today's India. The Middle Persian name of the Sassanian Empire, an empire that ruled Persia from the 3rd century to the 7th century, was \"Eran-shar\" meaning the \"Aryan Empire\". Today, the name \"Iran\" is simply the Persian word for \"Aryan\".\nSanskrit is the oldest written language of the Indo-European family of languages. The Vedas are composed in this language. Some portions of the Rigveda are thought to be the oldest writing in any Indo-European language.\nAryan equated with Indo-European.\nIn the late 18th century, Europeans began using the term \"Aryan\" to refer to the original prehistoric Proto-Indo-Europeans and their descendents up to the present day (i.e., the Indo-European peoples\u2014those Caucasians who are speakers of the Indo-European languages). This was the most common definition of \"Aryan\" in the 19th century and early 20th century.\nNazism.\nIn the late 19th century, some Europeans began to use the name \"Aryan\" for only the Nordic peoples of Europe (one branch of the Indo-European peoples), as a \"pure,\" \"noble\" and \"superior\" race they claimed were descended from the original Aryans.\nThe theory that the Aryans first came from Europe became especially accepted in Germany. It was widely believed that the \"Vedic Aryans\" were the same people as the Goths, Vandals and other ancient Germanic peoples who brought the Western Roman Empire to an end. This idea was often mixed with anti-Semitic ideas. The Master Race theory became a main idea for Nazis. After the Nazis took power in Germany in 1933, these ideas led to horrible persecutions of the Jews which culminated in the Holocaust.\nModern view.\nThe idea of racism that the Nazi theory means has been totally put aside by modern scientists, some of whom also disagree with the idea that the original Aryans ever lived in Europe. Most other scientists do maintain that the original Proto-Indo-Europeans did live about 5,000 years ago in the area in Europe east of Ukraine and north of the Caucasus Mountains and that the original Aryans (the \"Indo-Iranians\" or eastern branch of the Indo-European peoples) did migrate east to Iran and India from there, and the original ancestors of the modern \"European peoples\" (the western or \"European\" branch of the Indo-European peoples) did migrate west from there. This is called the Kurgan hypothesis."}
{"id": "21522", "revid": "147783", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21522", "title": "Casanova", "text": ""}
{"id": "21523", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21523", "title": "Venetian", "text": "Venetian might mean:"}
{"id": "21531", "revid": "7826739", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21531", "title": "Gypsy", "text": "Gypsy may mean:\nAn Alex Fitzgerald,\nIn music:\nIn fiction:\nOther meanings:"}
{"id": "21532", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21532", "title": "Uzbekistan", "text": "Uzbekistan is a country in Central Asia. Its capital and largest city is Tashkent. There are about 32 million people living in Uzbekistan, now. The neighbouring countries are Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan. It is a doubly landlocked country, of which there are only two in the world. Most people in Uzbekistan speak a language called Uzbek, a Turkic language similar to Uyghur and Turkish. In the Uzbek language, Uzbekistan is called \"O\u2018zbekiston\" and it means \"the land of the true nobles\". Uzbekistan has a long history. Humans first lived in Uzbekistan from before the 2nd millennium BC. The current president today is Shavkat Mirziyoyev. Human rights in Uzbekistan are 'atrocious' according to Human Rights Watch\nIslam is its largest religion.\nProvinces.\nUzbekistan is divided into twelve provinces, one autonomous republic, and one independent city. The provinces are divided into districts."}
{"id": "21533", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21533", "title": "1200s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21534", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21534", "title": "United Arab Emirates", "text": "United Arab Emirates (UAE) is a country in Western Asia. It borders Oman, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. Burj Khalifa is Earth's tallest artificial structure."}
{"id": "21538", "revid": "17988", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21538", "title": "Can", "text": "Can could mean:"}
{"id": "21539", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21539", "title": "Wok", "text": "A wok is a Chinese pan used for cooking. It has a round bottom. The most common use for the wok is stir frying, though it can also be used for deep frying, smoking, braising, roasting, grilling, and steaming.\nIn Indonesia, the wok is known as a \"wadjang\", \"kuali\" in Malaysia, and \"kawali\" (small wok) and \"kawa\" (big wok) in the Philippines."}
{"id": "21540", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21540", "title": "United States Navy", "text": "The United States Navy is part of the United States Armed Forces (the military of the USA). It is the largest navy in the world, with the estimated tonnage of its active battle fleet alone exceeding the next 13 navies combined, including 11 U.S. allies or partner nations. It has the highest combined battle fleet tonnage, and the world's largest aircraft carrier fleet, with eleven in service, two new carriers under construction, and five other carriers planned. With 336,978 personnel on active duty and 101,583 in the Ready Reserve, the U.S. Navy is the third largest of the U.S. military service branches in terms of personnel. It has 290 deployable combat vessels and more than 3,700 operational aircraft .\nHistory.\nThe navy was called the Continental Navy from 1775 until Congress disbanded it and sold the ships in 1785. It was started again as the Department of the Navy on April 30, 1798. The Department of the Navy needed places to make ships, which are called shipyards. So it paid slaveowners to borrow their slaves, then forced the slaves to build and run the shipyards in Washington, D.C., Norfolk, Virginia, and Pensacola, Florida.\nSailors.\nToday, the US Navy has over 300,000 sailors and officers, and almost another 100,000 workers who are not official sailors. \nStrength.\nThe US Navy has about 300 warships, or ships designed for fighting. The largest warships are aircraft carriers, which have large and flat decks that act as small airports for planes carrying weapons. The US Navy has more of these aircraft carriers than any other navy in the world, and a large number of planes in Naval Aviation. Aircraft carriers are often protected by smaller ships, called cruisers or destroyers. "}
{"id": "21541", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21541", "title": "Montreal, Quebec", "text": ""}
{"id": "21542", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21542", "title": "Pro bono", "text": "Pro bono is a Latin phrase meaning \"for [the] good\", that is used to mean that a legal professional (lawyer) who would otherwise be paid money for their work,\nworks without being paid, for the benefit of society,\ntypically on behalf of a person or organization who cannot pay for some reason, such as poverty."}
{"id": "21543", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21543", "title": "Ziggy", "text": "Ziggy could mean:"}
{"id": "21550", "revid": "838831", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21550", "title": "Chemical formula", "text": "A chemical formula is a way that chemists describe a molecule. The formula says what atoms, and how many of each type, are in the molecule. Sometimes the formula shows how the atoms are linked, and sometimes the formula shows how the atoms are arranged in space. \nThe letter shows what chemical element each atom is. The subscript shows the number of each type of atom. For example, hydrogen peroxide has the formula H2O2. Methane has one carbon (C) atom and four hydrogen atoms; the chemical formula is CH4. The sugar molecule glucose has six carbon atoms, twelve hydrogen atoms, and six oxygen atoms, so its chemical formula is C6H12O6.\nChemical formulas are used in chemical equations to describe chemical reactions.\nThe 19th-century Swedish chemist J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius worked out this system for writing chemical formulas.\nReading and writing formulas.\nChemical formulas are another way to represent the number of atoms. Chemical formulas are used to represent kinds of atoms in a combination. Chemical formulas use subscripts to tell how many of each atom are present in a combination. Subscripts are small numbers to the lower right of a symbol. They represent the number of atoms of that element in the equation. Before writing Chemical formulas, write down the symbol of each atom present in your equation. Writing chemical formula is a way of informing the chemical figure. It is most easily found in the periodic table. The periodic table is a chart of all well-known parts. Use the periodic table to reference the figure that cannot be remembered.\nElement families.\nDifferent elements are found in the periodic table. Each element has a family. An element family is an arrangement of elements. This element family has common properties. They are sharing the same characteristics.\nElements are displayed in order. Each element is put into families. There are three main categories such as metals, nonmetals, and semimetals. Each element family is displayed by the number of electrons in the outer shell. They can also display the same properties and valence electrons."}
{"id": "21551", "revid": "7837645", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21551", "title": "Harvard University", "text": "Harvard University is a private university in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and a member of the Ivy League. Harvard was started on September 8, 1636, and it is the oldest university in the United States. Harvard's current president is Lawrence Bacow. The school color is crimson, which is a dark red color. \nHarvard used slaves to serve its leaders and students, and the merchants who used their money to start the school used slaves too. Also, \u201cHarvard students slept in beds and ate meals prepared by slaves, and many grew up to be prominent slave-holders in early America.\" In the 20th century, the university invested millions of dollars in apartheid South Africa.\nHarvard is on the Charles River. Some students go to the Charles River for rowing. On the other side of the Charles River is the city of Boston. Boston's subway system has a stop at Harvard. Some of Harvard's graduate schools are in Boston, but most of Harvard's schools are in Cambridge. Together, these schools are Harvard University.\nHarvard has many libraries like Widener Library. There are other facilities like skating rinks and the Malkin Athletic Center where students can swim and exercise.\nHarvard is almost always ranked as one of the best universities in the world. Another famous school close to Harvard in Cambridge, Massachusetts is the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Eight Presidents of the United States have graduated from Harvard. Harvard has over $40 billion."}
{"id": "21553", "revid": "7854970", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21553", "title": "Tamil language", "text": "Tamil is a Dravidian language. It is spoken in the Tamil Nadu and Puducherry states of India and parts of Sri Lanka. Many people in Singapore and Malaysia also speak it. Many people speaking Tamil live in various places around the world. \nThe Tamil language is part of the Dravidian language family, which includes Telugu, Tamil, Kannada and Malayalam. According to a survey, 1863 newspapers are published in the Tamil language only every day. The oldest text found in Tamil is a grammatical work called the Tolk\u0101ppiyam. Tamil has a long literary history, and is spoken by almost 90 million people.\nTamil script.\nThe modern tamil script is an abugida, much like the other brahmic scripts that surround it and from whom it developed from. The tamil script has 23 consonants and 5 vowels which have long and short forms and the \"\u0101ytam\"\u00a0\u0b83. The \"\u0101ytam is\" used with other letters to represent sounds not native to the language\". \"The vowels are written as symbols above, below or on either side of the consonant. Much like other brahmic scripts, it is written from left to right.\nTamil is the dominant language in the state of Tamil Nadu, India, and Northern provinces of Sri Lanka. It is also spoken by significant immigrant communities and the historical Tamil diaspora in like the United States, Germany, Fiji, Indonesia, France, Africa and Thailand."}
{"id": "21555", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21555", "title": "Kerala", "text": "Kerala is a state in the Republic of India. It is in the south-west of the country. The west coast of the state is on the Arabian Sea. Tamil Nadu and Karnataka are to the east. Recently, a newly described tardigrade (water bears) species collected from Vadakara coast of Kerala named after Kerala State; \"Stygarctus keralensis\".\nThe capital city of the state is Thiruvananthapuram, even though the city of Kochi is more densely populated. The area of Kerala is 15,005 mi2 (38,863 km2), which is bigger than Bhutan but smaller than Switzerland. In traditional Indian geography it is part of South India.\nThere are 14 districts in Kerala. They are: Alappuzha, Ernakulam, Idukki, Kannur, Kasaragod, Kollam, Kottayam, Kozhikode, Malappuram, Palakkad, Pathanamthitta, Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur, and Wayanad.\nLanguage.\nPeople in Kerala speak Malayalam. More than 90% of the people can read the language.If we mix English and Malayalam together it makes Manglish. Manglish is used for people in Kerala if we try to speak it we can able to speak it very easily and fluently. Malayalam\nCulture.\nKerala is known for traditional arts and people enjoy traditional, percussion-filled music. They also enjoy tribal ceremonies, martial arts, and sports such as soccer, cricket, and badminton. Kerala is popular for Kalaripayattu, a martial arts form and Kathakali , a Hindu performance art. Most of the people have access to the internet, TVs, newspapers, and books. The average amount of reading per week is about seven hours. The literacy rate is approximately 99.7%.\nFestivals.\nThe most famous festivals held by Keralites are Onam, the harvest festival and Vishu, the Malayalam Calendar New Year. In addition to these, temples as well as churches hold festivals in several days of the year. A common tradition in all these festivals is the hosting of the holy flag, which is brought down on the last day of the festival. Some temple festivals are called poorams, and the most famous one among these is 'Thrissur Pooram'. The main attractions of poorams are firecrackers, traditional dance forms like 'Theyyam, Kathakali, Chakyar Koothu etc.'. Festivals are locally known as \"utsavams\" .\nTourism.\nKerala is one of the biggest tourist attractions in India, both for Indians as well as foreigners. It has beautiful beaches, hill stations and extensive backwaters. Kerala is also\u00a0known for its diverse nature."}
{"id": "21556", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21556", "title": "Tamil", "text": "Tamil might mean:"}
{"id": "21557", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21557", "title": "Malayalam", "text": "Malayalam is a language. Most people that speak Malayalam live in Kerala, in India. A speaker of Malayalam is called a \"Malayali\".\nMalayalam (/malayALam/) is the main language of the South Indian state of Kerala and also of the Lakshadweep Islands (Laccadives) of the west coast of India.\nMalayalis (speakers of Malayalam), who - males and females alike - are almost totally literate, constitute 4 percent of the population of India and 96 percent of the population of Kerala (29.01 million in 1991). \nIn terms of the number of speakers, Malayalam ranks eighth among the 18 major languages of India. \nMalyalam language has 52 phonemes. A few of the phonemes are unique for Malayalam.\nThe word /malayALam/ originally meant mountainous country (/mala/- mountain + /aLam/-place). Tamil Nadu is its neighbour on the south and east and Karnataka on the north and east."}
{"id": "21558", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21558", "title": "Coimbatore", "text": "Coimbatore (Tamil: \u0b95\u0bcb\u0baf\u0bae\u0bcd\u0baa\u0bc1\u0ba4\u0bcd\u0ba4\u0bc2\u0bb0\u0bcd), also known as Kovai (Tamil: \u0b95\u0bcb\u0bb5\u0bc8), is the second largest city in the Tamil Nadu, after Chennai. It is the administrative headquarters of the Coimbatore District and a major textile and engineering hub of South India. It forms a part of the ancient Kongu Nadu region of South India, where its people were the first to establish a territorial state. Coimbatore city, including its suburban areas has a population of 2.4 million people.\nIt is referred as the Manchester of South India in business circles, and has textile mills, engineering firms, automobile parts manufacturers, health care facilities and educational institutions. The hill stations of Ooty, Coonoor and Valparai are close to the city, making it a good tourist attraction throughout the year. The city is on the banks of the Noyyal River and is close to the Siruvani Waterfalls.This city is a textile based one.\nAvinashi is a nearby town where a famous Shiva Temple is located."}
{"id": "21560", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21560", "title": "Madurai", "text": "Madurai is a city in Tamil Nadu, India. It was the capital of the earlier Pandyan Kingdom.\nMeenakshi Amman Temple, Ayiram Kal Mandabam (Hall of Thousand Pillars) are some of the important tourist places in Madurai.\nMadurai is always considered to be a good pilgrim center. Tourists from various part of the country and world are coming to madurai and enjoying a historical excellence.\nThe main attraction of the city is meenakshi amman temple. Various other tourist and pilgrimage places also there such as Alagar Koil, Thiruparangkundram, Palarmuthir solai (means garden with fruits), Thirumalai naicker Mahal (palace of Naickers), Teppakulam (a square tank almost half a kilometer length as one side length), gandi museum (where we can find blood spotted final dress of Gandiji), etc.\nThe city is said to be as City of Festivals almost all the days in year is having at least a small festival. The city is also called 'thoonganagaram' which means Non-sleeping city.\nRoad side shops are very famous in Madurai where all can get good foods in cheaper costs. Jigardhanda, a typical Muslim cool drink is one of the famous drink from madurai. Madurai is very famous for jasmine flowers and Alanganallur located near Madurai is famous for Jallikattu. "}
{"id": "21561", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21561", "title": "Assam", "text": " \nAssam () is a state in the north eastern region of India. It has an area of 78,438 km\u00b2 (30,285 mi\u00b2). It is bigger than Panama but smaller than the Czech Republic. There is one major river (Brahamputra) that flows through the length of the state. The state lies on the foothills of the Himalayas. There are two international borders touched by Assam: Bhutan and Bangladesh. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North-east Indian zone.\nDemography.\nAccording to a 2021 survey, about 55% of the people are Hindus. About 40% are Muslim. There is a small (4%) Christian minority. Others (1%) consists of (Buddhism, Sikhism, Jainism, and Animism).\nAssam has a population of 36.5 million as per the 2021 population survey.\nLanguage.\nAssam has a population of 36.5 million as per the 2021 population survey.\nRelated pages.\nHinduism in Assam"}
{"id": "21562", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21562", "title": "Arunachal Pradesh", "text": "Arunachal Pradesh or South Tibet is a state between India and China. The country that owns this region is disputed. China says that they own it and call it South Tibet (Zangnan \u85cf\u5357). In 2017, China started renaming places in this territory. In 2019 China destroyed 30,000 \"incorrect\" world maps that showed South Tibet as part of India.\nHistory.\nThe territory's northern boundary is about 550 miles long. It is known as the McMahon Line. \nIt is part of the border dispute between India and China. There is another dispute to the northwest in Aksai Chin (also with Pakistan). \nIn 1962, the Sino-Indian War was fought here. The war was short and ended in India's defeat. However, China withdrew back to the modern borders voluntarily. They still say that they own the region. \nWho lives there?\nMost of the population look East Asian. The people look like their neighbors in Tibet and the Myanmar hill region. \nAs of 2001, there were 1,091,117 people living in South Tibet. The total area is 32,333 mi\u00b2 (83,743 km\u00b2). \nMost people speak Han\u2013Tibetan languages like Nyishi and Adi (over 50%). The rest speak Indo-Aryan languages like Nepali, Bengali, and Hindi. "}
{"id": "21563", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21563", "title": "Bihar", "text": "Bihar (; ) is a state in the Republic of India, covering an area of 38,202 mi\u00b2 (99,200 km\u00b2). The capital is Patna. Bihar is bordered by the Indian states of Uttar Pradesh to the west, Jharkhand to the south, and West Bengal to the east. To the north of Bihar is the country of Nepal. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the East Indian zone. It is one of the poorest regions in India."}
{"id": "21564", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21564", "title": "Chhattisgarh", "text": "Chhattisgarh is a state within the Republic of India. It occupies . In traditional Indian geography it falls under the East Indian zone.\nThe capital at present is Raipur which would change to 'Naya Raipur' near Raipur. It has eighteen districts: Raigarh, Bilaspur, Bijapur, Korba, Durg, Janjgir, Raipur, Koria, Sarguja, Bastar, Dantewada, Narayanpur, Rajnandgaon, Kanker, Mahasamund, Dhamtari, Jashpur and Kabirdham (Kawardha).\nThe main languages spoken are Hindi and Chhattisgarhi. The main religion is Hindu."}
{"id": "21565", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21565", "title": "Gujarat", "text": " \nGujarat (, ) is a state within the Republic of India. Gandhinagar is the capital of Gujarat. This city is named after Mahatma Gandhi. Its area is 75,686 mi\u00b2 (196,077 km\u00b2), excluding the Kori Creek of the Rann of Kachchh: which is disputed by Pakistan , but it includes the Kutch District, in terms of area it is bigger than Syria but smaller than Senegal. \nIn traditional Indian geography it falls under the West Indian zone. Ahmedabad, Baroda, Surat, Bharuch, Porbandar, Rajkot, Jamnagar are some important cities in Gujarat. Champaner, Gondal, Bhavnagar, Utelia, Zainabad, Bhuj, Sasangir are some tourist places. People in Gujarat are mainly engaged in Agriculture and business.\nThe state is bordered by Rajasthan to the north, Maharashtra to the south, Madhya Pradesh to the east, and the Arabian Sea and the Pakistani province of Sindh to the west. Its capital city is Gandhinagar, while its largest city is Ahmedabad. Gujarat is native place to the Gujarati-speaking people of India.\nEtymology.\nGujarat is derived from the Sanskrit term \"Gurjaradesa\", meaning \"The Land of the Gurjaras\", who ruled Gujarat in the 8th and 9th centuries CE. Parts of modern Rajasthan and Gujarat have been known as \"Gurjaratra\" or \"Gurjarabhumi\" (land of the Gurjars) for centuries before the Mughal period."}
{"id": "21566", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21566", "title": "Haryana", "text": "Haryana () is a state in the Republic of India. It is the birthplace of Hinduism. The main dialect spoken in the area is Haryanvi. The area is . It is larger than Denmark but smaller than Estonia. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North Indian zone."}
{"id": "21567", "revid": "1157216", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21567", "title": "Himachal Pradesh", "text": "Himachal Pradesh () is a state in northern India. Shimla is the capital of Himachal Pradesh. It covers an area of 55,673 km\u00b2 (21,495 mi\u00b2), although the border with China is still disputed. The land contains high mountains. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North Indian zone. It borders to Jammu and Kashmir to the north.\nHimachal Pradesh was part of Indian Punjab before 1966.\nThe State of HP is divided into three Divisions, namely Mandi Division, Kangra Division, Shimla Division. The divisions are further sub-divided into 12 districts. These are further divided into 73 sub-divisions, 172 tehsils and 35 sub-tehsils."}
{"id": "21568", "revid": "1153052", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21568", "title": "Jammu and Kashmir (state)", "text": "Jammu and Kashmir was the northmost state of India. The state covered and is mostly in the Himalayan mountains. Jammu and Kashmir used to be a British protectorate in 1860. Jammu and Kashmir borderd the states of Himachal Pradesh and Punjab to the south-east and south respectively. The other parts of state are administered by Pakistan as Azad Jammu and Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan. \nJammu and Kashmir has been a subject of dispute between India and Pakistan since 1947, and China since 1962.\nDemographics.\nJammu and Kashmir has a Muslim majority population. Though Islam is practiced by about 67% of the population of the state and by 97% of the population of the Kashmir valley, the state has large communities of Buddhists, Hindus (inclusive of Meghwal and Sikhs).\nJammu and Kashmir consisted of three divisions: Jammu region, Kashmir Valley, and the Ladakh region. Srinagar is the summer capital, and Jammu its winter capital. The Kashmir valley, often called \"paradise on Earth\", is famous for its beautiful mountainous landscape. Jammu's numerous holy shrines attracts millions of Hindu pilgrims every year from all over the India. Ladakh, also known as \"Little Tibet\", is renowned for its remote mountain beauty and Buddhist culture."}
{"id": "21569", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21569", "title": "Jharkhand", "text": "Jharkhand (, ) is a state in the Republic of India. About 20,000,000 people live there. The state covers . It is bigger than Sierra Leone but smaller than Panama. It has many villages and towns. Ranchi is the capital city. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the East Indian zone."}
{"id": "21570", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21570", "title": "Madhya Pradesh", "text": "Madhya Pradesh is a state in the Republic of India. The state has an area of . It is bigger than Italy but smaller than Oman. About 70,000,000 people live there. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the West Indian zone. The capital of the state is Bhopal. \nThe largest city is Indore. Other main cities are Jabalpur and Ujjain. Ujjain is well known for mythological reasons. Mandav, Bhojpur and Panchmadi are the main tourist attractions.\nTo the north of Madhya Pradesh is the state of Uttar Pradesh and to the northwest is the state of Rajasthan, while Maharashtra is to the southwest."}
{"id": "21571", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21571", "title": "Manipur", "text": "Manipur () is a state within the Republic of India. It has area of 8,628 mi\u00b2 (22,347 km\u00b2). In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North-east Indian zone.\nThe state is bordered by the Indian states of Nagaland to its north, Mizoram to its south and Assam to its west. Its eastern border is the Indian border with Myanmar. Manipur has a long recorded written history of kings ascended in the main throne of Kangla. The list of these kings can be found in a chronicle known as Cheitharol Kumbaba. Cheitharol Kumbaba, also spelled Cheitharon Kumpapa, is the court chronicle of the kings of Manipur. It recorded the history of the Kingdom of Manipur from the founding of the Ningthouja dynasty in 33 CE under king Nongda Lairen Pakhangba until the merger of the kingdom with India in 1949 and the subsequent abolition of monarchy. It ends with the last king of Manipur, Bodhchandra. The Cheitharol Kumbaba is probably one of the oldest chronicles of the region and is written on more than 1000 leaves of Meetei paper in Meetei Mayek, an early Meitei script."}
{"id": "21572", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21572", "title": "Meghalaya", "text": "Meghalaya () is a state within the Republic of India. Occupying an area of 8,660 mi\u00b2 (22,429 km\u00b2), bigger than the State of Israel but smaller than Belize. Its capital is Shillong. Meghalaya's population is 2,318,822. The population of Shillong was 314,610 in 2001. There are problems in Meghalaya arise from the divide between tribals and non tribal settlers, identity issues and growing corruption besides the fear of being reduced to minority by native tribals. The activity status is classified as active. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North-east Indian zone."}
{"id": "21573", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21573", "title": "Mizoram", "text": "Mizoram is a state in the Republic of India. It is in the eastern region beyond Bangladesh. It covers an area of . It is bigger than the nation of El Salvador but smaller than the State of Israel. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North-east Indian zone. In 2011, Mizoram had 1,091,014 people. It has less people than every other state except Sikkim.\nThe word \"Mizoram\" means \"land of the Mizo people\". It is one of the Seven Sister States in North Eastern India, sharing borders with the states of Tripura, Assam, Manipur and with the neighbouring countries of Bangladesh and Myanmar. Mizoram became the 23rd state of India on 20 February 1987. The capital of Mizoram is Aizawl."}
{"id": "21574", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21574", "title": "Nagaland", "text": "Nagaland is a northeastern state in the Republic of India. It has an area of . It is bigger than East Timor but smaller than Eswatini. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North-east Indian zone."}
{"id": "21575", "revid": "1060941", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21575", "title": "Odisha", "text": "Odisha, formerly Orissa, is a state in Eastern India, with an area of , and population of almost 42 million. Oriya or Odia is the most widely spoken language in the state and is used on an official basis alongside English. Chilika lake which is located in Odisha is the largest migratory birds on the Indian subcontinent. Odisha is the 8th largest Indian State and the 11th most populous. The capital city is Bhubaneswar, and other major cities in the state are Cuttack, Sambalpur, and Rourkela. Odisha is bordered by the states of West Bengal to the north east, Jharkhand to the north west, Chhattisgarh to the west, Andhra Pradesh to the south, and has a 482km coastline along the Bay of Bengal.\nModern-day Odisha falls under the boundaries of the ancient kingdom of Kalinga in the 3rd Century BCE, and the state is still sometimes referred to as Kalinga. Odisha is also known as Utkal, and is mentioned in the Indian National Anthem, Jana Gana Mana, under this name. The Orissa province was founded on the 1st April 1936, and the anniversary of this is celebrated as \"Utkal Dibas\" throughout the state. The state was created on the basis of the Odia language, encompassing the native speakers of the language.\nPopular tourist destinations in Odisha include the Konark Sun Temple, the Udayagiri and Khandagiri caves, the Puri Jagannath Temple, and Chilika Lake. Odisha has a rich culture, the Odissi classical dance form originates from the state and Odia cuisine is well-renowned for its seafood dishes and desserts. Odisha has successfully hosted several sports events as Asian Junior Women's Rugby Tournament, the 22nd Asian Athletics Championship, and the Men's Hockey World Cup in 2018.\nOdisha is mostly inhabited by the Odia people, with Hinduism being the major religion in the state and Christian and Muslim minorities. There is a large tribal population in Odisha, referred to as the \"adivasi\" people, they are the indigenous people and speak various tribal languages and follow traditional religions, although many have converted to Christianity. Jainism and Buddhism also have important histories in the state.\nBiju Patnaik International Airport (BBI) is Odisha's only airport, and the state is well-connected by railways, and national highways. The current Chief Minister of the state is Naveen Patnaik. "}
{"id": "21576", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21576", "title": "Punjab, India", "text": "Punjab (, ) is a state in the northern Republic of India. About 24 million people live there. Its national capital city is Chandigarh. The city is a separate territory, because it is also used be the capital of Haryana. The state is in the Punjab region. It covers an area of 19,445 mi\u00b2 or 50,362 km\u00b2. It is bigger than Slovakia but smaller than Costa Rica. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North Indian zone. The state of Punjab has 22 districts. It is mainly known as the land of god/gurus, Punjab's culture is very rich and the dwellers of Punjab respect their culture . The half population of Punjab depends on agriculture, that's why its known as food-provider (anna-datta- in Punjabi). In Punjab people of all religions live with integrity and love .\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Doab\" is a combination of the Indo-Iranian words \"Doab\" (\"two\") and \"\u0101b\" (\"water\"), and thus the (land of) \"two rivers\". The two rivers are the Beas and Sutlej. Sometimes, in English, there can be a definite article before the name i.e. \"the Doaba\". The name is also sometimes spelled as \"Duoab\" or \"Douaab\" or \"Doaab\".\nIt originally contained 5 rivers before partition, British influence and the influence of the Indian government, so therefore its name came from the Punjabi word for five (Panj/Punj) and the word for river/water (ab).\nHistory.\nAll of India was once ruled by the British Empire. The Indians wanted freedom, but the Hindus, Sikhs and the Muslims of India always argued. So it was decided to divide the country into two parts\u2014one part for Muslims and one part for Hindus and Sikhs. In 1947 Punjab (British India), which was a province of India, was divided into West Punjab and East Punjab (which the state is home to the active independence movement of Khalistan by the Sikh nationalists). East Punjab went to the Republic of modern India, and West Punjab went to Islamic Pakistan."}
{"id": "21577", "revid": "7855482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21577", "title": "Rajasthan", "text": " \nRajasthan (Sindhi:\u0631\u0627\u062c\u0633\u062a\u0627\u0646) (Awadhi:\u0930\u093e\u091c\u0938\u094d\u0925\u093e\u0928) or the former : Rajputana is a state in northwestern India. It is the largest state of India in terms of land area; 132,150 mi\u00b2 or 342,269 km\u00b2. It is bigger than the Republic of the Congo but smaller than Germany. In traditional India geography it falls under the North Indian zone. The Thar Desert covers most parts of the state. The capital of the state is city of Jaipur.\nBefore Indian independence the area of Rajasthan was known as Rajputana; it consisted of many states of varying sizes ruled by Rajput princes."}
{"id": "21578", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21578", "title": "Tripura", "text": "Tripura () () is a state in Northeast India. It covers an area of .It is the 3rd smallest state of India. It is bigger than Lebanon but smaller than Kosovo. The capital city is Agartala.\nPolitical history.\nIt is a Disputed Territory claimed as \"Chittagonian Plains\" by Bangladesh. Bangladesh says that as Tripura was an Independent Kingdom and never part of British India, the Republic of India had no right to annex the country after the death of its last King."}
{"id": "21579", "revid": "7857933", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21579", "title": "Uttarakhand", "text": " \nUttarakhand (2000-2006: Uttaranchal); (Sanskrit:\u0909\u0924\u094d\u0924\u0930\u0916\u0928\u094d\u0926\u094d), is a state in northern India. The state had 8,479,562 people as of the 2001 census. It covers an area of . It is bigger than Bosnia and Herzegovina, but smaller than Croatia, although the border with China is still disputed. The land contains high mountains. In traditional Indian geography, it falls within the North Indian zone."}
{"id": "21580", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21580", "title": "Uttar Pradesh", "text": "Uttar Pradesh (, ) is a state in northern India. For short, people call it UP. Lucknow is the capital city of UP. \nThe population of the state is 199,581,477 (census 2011). Uttar Pradesh has more people than any other state of India. It covers an area of 93,933 mi\u00b2 (243,286 km\u00b2). It is bigger than the United Kingdom but smaller than Guinea. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the North Indian zone.\nGeography.\nUttar Pradesh has a long border with Nepal to the north. Next to it are also the Indian states of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Bihar. There are two geographical main regions:-\nClimate.\nThe climate of Uttar Pradesh is mostly subtropical. However weather conditions change a lot depending on where one lives and the season.\n\"Temperature\": The average temperatures vary from 12.5\u201317.5\u00b0C (54.5\u201363.5\u00b0F) in January to 27.5\u201332.5\u00b0C (81.5\u201390.5\u00b0F) in May and June. The highest temperature recorded in the State was 49.9\u00b0C (121.8\u00b0F). It was at Gonda on May 8, 1958.\n\"Rainfall\": Rainfall is between 1,000 and 2,000\u00a0mm (40\u201380 inches) in the east and between 600 and 1,000\u00a0mm (24\u201340 inches) in the west. Most of the rain is due to the southwest monsoon. It lasts from June to September. Consequently, floods are a problem during those seasons. They badly damage crops and property.\n\"Droughts\": They occur when the monsoon does not come in the usual season. It leads to crop failure.\n\"Snowfall\": In the Himalayan region of the State it usually snows from 3 to 5 metres (10 to15 feet) between December and March.\nTransportation.\nAirways: The state has four important airports and 23 air strips. They are in Agra, Kanpur, Lucknow and Varanasi. Lucknow is the biggest and most important airport of the state. \nRailways: Almost all the major cities and even some smaller cities are linked. The state has the largest railway network in the country. Its total length is 8,546\u00a0km (2006). It has the sixth largest railway density.\nRoadways: The state has the largest road network in the country. The biggest is Maharashtra. There are 31 National Highways (NH). In total they are of 4,942\u00a0km (8.5% of total NH length in India). It has the seventh highest road density in the India (1,027\u00a0km per 1000\u00a0km2 in 2002). It also has the largest surfaced urban road network in the country (50,721\u00a0km, as on 2002). Cities of Kanpur, Lucknow, Bareilly, Allahabad, Varanasi, Jhansi, Gorakhpur, Noida, Ghaziabad, Meerut, Mathura, Agra and Ghazipur are connected to many National Highways.\nWaterways: The river Ganges - from Allahabad (Uttar Pradesh) to Haldia (West Bengal) - has been declared as National Waterway (NW)-I and 600\u00a0km of the total NW-I lies in Uttar Pradesh."}
{"id": "21581", "revid": "1060941", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21581", "title": "West Bengal", "text": " \nWest Bengal () is a state in India. It is in the eastern part of the country. West Bengal is the fourth most populous state in India. It is also the seventh most populous sub-national entity in the world. West Bengal is the sixth largest contributor to India's GDP. \nBoth West Bengal and Bangladesh are parts of historical and geographic region of Bengal. Kolkata is the capital city of West Bengal. In 2001, 80,221,171 people lived in West Bengal. With an area of , it is bigger than Serbia but smaller than Jordan. In traditional Indian geography it falls under the East Indian zone.\nWest Bengal has a tropical climate, so it is very hot and humid in summer and cool in winter. The people who live here are called Bengalis. Bengalis also live in Bangladesh. Bangladesh is a country to the east of West Bengal\nHistory.\nAll of India was once ruled by the British Empire. The Indians wanted freedom, but the Hindus and the Muslims of India always argued. So it was decided to divide the country into two parts\u2014one part for Muslims and the other part for Hindus. In 1947 Bengal, which was a province of India, was divided into West Bengal and East Bengal,which is now called Bangladesh. West Bengal went to India, and East Bengal went to Pakistan and was called East Pakistan. In 1971, Bangladesh became independent, as a result of the Bangladesh Liberation War. \nFamous people from West Bengal include:"}
{"id": "21582", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21582", "title": "Racialism", "text": ""}
{"id": "21583", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21583", "title": "Szczecin", "text": "Szczecin () is a large city in Poland in West Pomeranian Voivodeship. As of 2005, 411,119 people live there. The city is on the river Odra (), near the border to Germany. It is one of the largest sea ports on the Baltic. It is the historical capital of the German province of Pomerania. Szczecin has got one of the biggest harbours on the Baltic Sea.\nSzczecin borders with Police, a district town at the Oder River."}
{"id": "21584", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21584", "title": "Stettin", "text": ""}
{"id": "21585", "revid": "27951", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21585", "title": "Foreigner", "text": ""}
{"id": "21586", "revid": "7624893", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21586", "title": "Metropolitan area", "text": "A metropolitan area is a city and its surrounding suburbs. The word \"metropolitan\" comes from two Greek language words meaning \"mother\" and \"city\". A metropolitan area may be much larger than its inner city, and its suburbs may be smaller towns and villages which are now connected to the larger city as it has grown. The biggest such metropolitan area is that of Tokyo. 8.5 million people live in Tokyo itself, 36.5 million live in the \"metropolitan area\".\nA metropolitan area is a large urban area. The inner city may look little different from the surrounding area of buildings and lights. The entire built-up area is the metropolitan area. The inner city may be near the middle, or to one side. Some urban areas have more than one inner city. \nSome places, such as in Australia, have metropolitan government. The entire metropolitan area is included as a part of the city, and the population of the suburban area is considered to be part of the city's population. \nSydney, for example, has a population of approx. 4.5 million people, which includes the population of the suburbs, although there are some places which are part of the Greater Sydney Area, whose population does not count toward the population of Sydney. "}
{"id": "21587", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21587", "title": "Agglomeration", "text": ""}
{"id": "21588", "revid": "963908", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21588", "title": "Marathi language", "text": "Marathi (\"\") is the language spoken in Maharashtra, India. It is also Maharashtra's official language. The written script is Devan\u0101gar\u012b.\nPeople living in Maharashtra and parts of neighboring states of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Chattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh, union-territories of Daman-diu and Dadra Nagar Haveli speak Marathi."}
{"id": "21589", "revid": "7869814", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21589", "title": "Gujarati language", "text": "Gujarati is an Indo-Aryan language. It is spoken in Gujarat, India and also in neighbouring Pakistan. There are millions of Gujaratis who speak it as their first language. Gujarati is the 20th most common language in the United States of America. "}
{"id": "21590", "revid": "129433", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21590", "title": "Punjabi language", "text": "Punjabi is an Indo-Aryan language. It is the first language of about 130 million people, and is the 10th most spoken language in the world. Most of the people who speak this language live in the Punjab region of Pakistan and India. It is also widely spoken in Haryana, India Himachal Pradesh, India and Delhi, India, uttarpradesh rajasthan, Bihar, Jammu amd Kashmir and other states as well . It is spoken by the majority of the population of Pakistan.\nPunjabi developed from the ancient language of Prakrit developed simultaneously with Sanskrit. Punjabi is known to have been spoken by the Indus Valley civilization according to DR Jaspal Singh Mayell. \"Possibly, Punjabi is the only major South Asian language that has this kind of tonal character. There does seem to have been some speculation among scholars about the possible origin of Punjabi's tone-language character but without any final and convincing answer...\"\nPunjabi is written in two different scripts, called Gurmukh\u012b and Shahmukh\u012b. Punjabi is the main language spoken by the Sikhs. Most parts of the Guru Granth Sahib use the Punjabi language written in Gurmukh\u012b, though Punjabi is not the only language used in Sikh scriptures. The \"Janamsakhis\", stories on the life and legend of Guru Nanak (1469\u20131539), are \nAryan\nDialects.\nPunjabi has many dialects. The dialects are similar enough to each other that speakers can understand most of the dialects that are related to theirs. In India, the main dialects of Punjabi are: Majhi, Doabi, Malwi and Pwadhi. In Pakistan, the main dialects are Majhi, \"Shahpuri\", and \"Jhangvi\".\nMajhi is Punjabi's standard dialect because it forms the standard for writing in Punjabi. It is spoken in the centre of Punjab, including the districts of Lahore, Sheikhupura, Kasur, Okara, Nankana Sahib, Faisalabad, Gujranwala, Sialkot, Narowal, Gujrat, Pakpattan, Hafizabad and Mandi Bahauddin. In India it is spoken in Amritsar, Tarn Taran Sahib and Gurdaspur districts.\nOther dialects of Punjabi include Pahari, Rachnavi, Chenavari, Chhachi, Jandali, Ghebi. The Saraiki, spoken in southern Punjab, and Dogri, spoken in Kashmir, are closely related to Punjabi. The relation of several dialects to languages other than Punjabi creates problems in assigning them to one or another \"language\".\nDistribution.\nOver 93% of people who speak Punjabi as their first language live in Pakistan and India. It is the most widely spoken native language in Pakistan. It is spoken as a first language by over 44% of Pakistanis. There were 76 million Punjabi speakers in Pakistan in 2008. In India, Punjabi is spoken as a native language by 3% of the population. This was about 33 million in 2011. It is the official language of the Indian states of Punjab and Haryana.\nPunjabi is also spoken as a minority language in several other countries where large numbers of Punjabis have emigrated.In the United Kingdom, it is the second-most-commonly used language. In Canada, it is the fourth-most-spoken language. There were 2.2 million Punjabi speakers in the US in 2017. and 1.3 million in the UK in 2000. \nWriting system.\nThere are three ways to write Punjabi: Gurmukh\u012b, Shahmukh\u012b, and Devan\u0101gar\u012b. In the Punjab province of Pakistan, the script that is most used is Shahmukh\u012b. The Majhi dialect is the written standard for Punjabi in both parts of Punjab."}
{"id": "21592", "revid": "7884098", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21592", "title": "Sikhism", "text": "Sikhism is a Dharmic faith or Indic Faith which means it was originated in Indian Subcontinent and whose followers are called \"Sikhs\". The word Sikh means student or discipline. Their holy book is the \"Adi Guru Granth Sahib Ji\". \nMany sources call Sikhism a monotheistic religion, According to Eleanor Nesbitt, English renderings of Sikhism as a monotheistic religion \"tend misleadingly to reinforce a Semitic understanding of monotheism, rather than Guru Nanak's mystical awareness of the one that is expressed through the many. However, what is not in doubt is the emphasis on 'one'\".\nAn estimated 180 million people are followers of Sikhism, which then makes it the fifth largest organized religion in the world just after Christianity, Islam, Hinduism and Buddhism A popular place where this religion is practiced is in South Asia. Sikhs are usually identified by the Turban (which Sikhs call a Dastaar or Pagri), distinctive headgear which could be worn by both men and women. Sikhs arrived in North America, South Asia and in 5th June 1897 and played a pivotal role in the opening of the West and construction of the Panama Canal. \nSikhism was brought to the world around 1469 by Guru Nanak Dev, the first of the \"Ten Gurus\". Guru Nanak brought the Word of God to manifest upon Earth. Through his Hymns and Prayers (Shabads), he inspired and uplifted humankind to live a life of truth, righteousness and spirituality. These Hymns and Prayers were compiled into the Siri Guru Granth Sahib. Unique amongst the world's major religious scriptures, while compiling the Guru Granth Sahib, the Sikh Gurus incorporated not only their own writings, but also included the writings of other contemporary saints from Hinduism and Islam (including saints belonging to the lowest strata of untouchables in the Hindu Caste System), who believed in the unity of God and denounced superstition and caste. Further, the composition and compilation of the Guru Granth Sahib was performed by the Sikh Gurus themselves, rather than being performed by their adherents and followers.\nIn 1699, Guru Gobind Singh, the Tenth Guru, established the Khalsa and gave Sikhs a distinct identity and reinforced principles taught by all Gurus. This celebration took place on Vaisakhi and is commemorated each year. One of the most important ceremonies established by Guru Gobind Singh on that day is Khande di Pahul baptism ceremony, where Sikhs are initiated into the Khalsa and are required to keep the 5 Ks, kakkars or kakke which are articles of faith. Guru Granth Sahib was bestowed the Guruship by the last of the human form Sikh Gurus, Guru Gobind Singh Ji in 1708. Before passing away, Guru Gobind Singh Ji decreed that the Sikhs were to regard the Granth Sahib as their next and everlasting Guru. Guru Ji said \u2013 \u201cSab Sikhan ko hukam hai Guru Manyo Granth\u201d meaning \u201cAll Sikhs are commanded to take the Granth as Guru\u201d. So today, if asked, the Sikhs will tell you that they have a total of 11 Gurus. (10 Gurus in human form, and the eternal shabad Guru, the Siri Guru Granth Sahib).\nBeliefs.\nGuru Granth Sahib is not just a holy book for Sikhs, it is respected and treated as a living being as it is officially The Eternal Guru (Teachers). Shri Guru Granth Sahib is not written by one human but by saints from all across societies and religions. It is a universal teacher for all religions giving the message of one God and respect to all humans of every religion.\nGod.\nSikhism teaches that God lasts forever, cannot be seen, and has no body. Therefore, God has no gender. It is taught that God created the universe and keeps it running. God is considered to be infinite, Alpha and Omega, no beginning and no end. Sikhs worship God, and meditate on God\u2019s name through intense (passionate) repetition. They believe everything is a part of God and God is a part of everything. Good, bad, neutral are not applicable to God and are meant only for human beings, as Sikh philosophy indicates that human beings are born innately good. Since god created the world he could destroy it whenever he wants.\nSalvation.\nFollowers are all trying to reach salvation, meaning they are trying to break the process of rebirth and become one with God. The thing that is keeping people from reaching union is bad karma. Bad karma is taught to be caused by pride, anger, greed, attachment and lust. Sikhs try to stay away from these things. Sikhs also believe that a piece of God resides within everything in the world. Once an individual discovers the God within and stops searching else then can he reach salvation.\nTemples.\nA Sikh temple is called a \"Gurdwara\" (meaning \"the house of Guru\"). It is the place of worship in the Sikh religion. Birth, death, baptism and marriage ceremonies are held in the temple. There are four doors for all religions. When a person enters the temple, their head must be covered. There are no chairs in the temple so people sit on the floor.\nThe temple also serves as a kitchen. The kitchen is where festival food is donated, prepared and cooked by volunteers. All the food that has been made there is shared with all the community who visit the temple on that day. The meal is vegetarian and is called the Langar.\nThe Golden Temple in Amritsar is the most famous temple in all of the Sikh faith. It is covered in gold.\nIn a Gurdwara, no special place or seat may be reserved or set aside for any dignitary, as all are considered equals. The service consists of singing of the liturgy, as well as the exposition of Sikh history, tradition, and theology. In traditional Indian society, people of high and low caste were rigidly segregated. To combat this social problem, the Sikh community kitchen, or \"langar\", requires everyone to sit side by side and eat together, thereby teaching the concept of equality by shattering all barriers of caste and class. Every major city in the United States and Canada has Sikh gurdwaras and they are open to all Sikh people go to Gurdwara to worship God.\nVaisakhi.\nVaisakhi is an important festival celebrated by Sikhs. Vaisakhi is also known as Basaki. It is the harvest festival in the Punjab region. Vaisakhi is celebrated on the first day of the Basak month, in the Sikh calendar.\nGurus and religious authority.\nThe term guru comes from the Sanskrit \"gur\u016b\", which means teacher, guide, or mentor. The traditions and philosophy of Sikhism were made by ten gurus from 1469 to 1708. Each guru added to and reinforced the message taught by the previous one. This resulted in the creation of the Sikh religion.\nAnd the eternal Guru is the Sri Guru Granth Sahib, which is a not just a book but contains the writings of each Guru.\nIn addition to the above, Sikhs also believe in fifteen \"bhagats\" or saints, including ones from other creeds, whose words and deeds have been adopted into Sikhism by the great ten Gurus. Most notable of these \"bhagats\" is the Punjabi Sufi saint, Hazrat Baba Farfood \nFood Banks \nSikhs believe in equality therefore they have food banks to go and get food for free. \nExtra facts \nIt is said that Sikhs have to give 10% of their earnings to charity. \nSikhs believe in equality therefore the are all equal in money. Nobody is poor and nobody is rich. There is a Sikh alphabet. Sikhism, religion and philosophy founded in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent in the late 15th century. The Sikhs call their faith Gurmat (Punjabi: \u201cthe Way of the Guru\u201d). According to Sikh tradition, Sikhism was established by Guru Nanak (1469\u20131539) and subsequently led by a succession of nine other Gurus.\n5 Ks.\nKhalsa is the military community of Sikhism. A Sikh must follow the 5 Ks:"}
{"id": "21593", "revid": "361992", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21593", "title": "Kaveri River", "text": "Kaveri is a river in south India. It flows from Karnataka to Tamil Nadu."}
{"id": "21595", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21595", "title": "Bhopal", "text": "Bhopal is the capital of Madhya Pradesh, India, and the second largest city of the state, after Indore. Bhopal is also called the City of Lakes. It is the headquarters of Bhopal District. It is in the central part of India.\nThe city is believed to have first been called Bhojpal, named after the King of Bhoj. According to this theory, it was later changed to Bhopal.\nBhopal has an average elevation of 499 metres (1637\u00a0ft). \nBhopal Disaster.\nIn 1984 a poisoned gas was leaked from a private chemical factory at night when a worker was cleaning out a clogged pipe connected with a tank containing gas. The tank had 42 tons of methyl isocyanate (MIC) that was leaked at midnight and leaving more than 5,000 people and animals dead. Many people also became sick and they are still suffering from deadly diseases. This has been called as \"World's worst industrial disaster\"."}
{"id": "21596", "revid": "7462202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21596", "title": "Dialect", "text": "A dialect is a form of a language spoken by a group of people. Some people who live in the same place share a dialect. Some people who are similar in some other way, such as social class, share a dialect. \nThere is no absolute difference between a dialect and a language. British English and American English are different standard dialects of English. They differ slightly in spelling, pronunciation, and vocabulary. However, they are \"mutually intelligible\", which means people who speak either variety understand the other.\nDeciding if something is a language or a dialect is sometimes a political decision as a way to make minority groups assimilate or become part of a nation's larger culture. The linguist Max Weinreich once joked that \"a language is a dialect with an army and a navy.\"\nExamples.\nJapanese and the Okinawan language are related, as they are Japonic languages, but they are not mutually intelligible. When Japan took over Okinawa during the Meiji Era, the Japanese government called the Okinawan language a dialect of Japanese. This was used to forbid Okinawans from speaking Okinawan and to force them to Japanese.\nCatalan and Galician used to be considered as dialects of Spanish but are now recognized as languages. They are about as near to Portuguese and to Occitan, respectively, as they are to Spanish.\nHindi and Urdu are called different languages today, but they used to be the same language, Hindustani. After Pakistan became separate from India, Hindustani became called Urdu in Pakistan and Hindi in India. However, speakers of both can understand each other if they are using everyday speech. The two languages use different writing systems, but writing systems are not an accurate way to decide if languages are related.\nEnglish is definitely a language, but it once was Anglo-Saxon, a dialect of Old Saxon.\nChinese is called a language, but has hundreds of dialects, such as Mandarin, Cantonese, Wu, and Hokkien. Many of them are not mutually intelligible.\nIn past times, travel was difficult and so dialects developed in quite small regions. In Britain, there were dialects in the different parts of the country, and traces can stiill be heard today. The Romance languages were dialects of Latin that separated in that way.\nDifferences in dialects can be:\nIn India, there are scores of dialects of Hindi language like Rajasthani, Bhojpuri, Chhattisgarhi, Magadhi, Haryanvi and others. Moreover,people whose native language is Hindi, may or maynot treat it as their mother tongue. "}
{"id": "21597", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21597", "title": "Thanjavur", "text": "Thanjavur is a town in Tamil Nadu, India. It was the capital of earlier Chola Kingdom. It is called the \"Rice Bowl\" of Tamil Nadu. Cauvery river flows through Thanjavur."}
{"id": "21598", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21598", "title": "Trichy", "text": ""}
{"id": "21599", "revid": "294863", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21599", "title": "Brihadisvara Temple", "text": ""}
{"id": "21600", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21600", "title": "Lozi", "text": "Lozi could mean:"}
{"id": "21601", "revid": "2131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21601", "title": "Silozi", "text": ""}
{"id": "21602", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21602", "title": "Oman", "text": "Oman, officially the Sultanate of Oman, is a country in the southwestern part of Asia, on the southeastern coast of the Arabian Peninsula. It borders the United Arab Emirates to the northwest, Saudi Arabia to the west, and Yemen to the southwest. The coast is formed by the Arabian Sea to the south and east, and the Gulf of Oman to the northeast. The capital is Muscat.\nThe country is a monarchy, ruled by a Sultan, and the people are called Omanis. Right now, the sultan is Haitham bin Tariq Al Said. For a long time, the British have supported the sultans of Oman. In the 1960s and 1970s, some Omanis started a revolution to overthrow the sultan and end oppression, but the sultan defeated them with the help of Great Britain.\nDivisions.\nSince 28 October 2011, Oman is divided into Eleven Governorates (Muhafazah):\nBelow the governorates, Oman is divided into provinces.\nClimate.\nOman has a hot climate and very little rainfall. Annual rainfall in Muscat averages , falling mostly in January. Dhofar is subject to the southwest monsoon, and rainfall up to has been recorded in the rainy season from late June to October. While the mountain areas receive more rainfall, some parts of the coast, particularly near the island of Masirah, sometimes receive no rain at all within the course of a year. The climate generally is very hot, with temperatures reaching around (peak) in the hot season, from May to September."}
{"id": "21603", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21603", "title": "Sultanate of Oman", "text": ""}
{"id": "21604", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21604", "title": "Refugee", "text": "In 1951, the United Nations (UN) law called Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, said a refugee was a person who is forced to leave their country due to natural disasters or war and conflict\nowing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion, is outside the country of their nationality, and is unable to or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail him/herself of the protection of that country.\nIn 1967 the Conventions\u2019 1967 protocol and by regional conventions in Africa and Latin America to include persons who had fled war and violence in their country. A person who is seeking to be recognized as a refugee is an asylum seeker. In the United States a recognized asylum seeker is known as an asylee.\nA refugee is a person who has to leave his or her country. This can be because of different reasons:"}
{"id": "21606", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21606", "title": "Copperbelt", "text": "Copperbelt is a province in the northern part of Zambia. It is named after the copper reserves. It has an area of 31,328\u00a0km2. It occupies the upper portion of the Kafue river basin on the central plateau of southern Africa, 900 to 1,500 m above sea level.\nIt is one of the Zambia's ten provinces and the hub of the country."}
{"id": "21607", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21607", "title": "Levy Mwanawasa", "text": "Levy Patrick Mwanawasa (September 3, 1948 \u2013 August 19, 2008) was a Zambian politician. He was the President of Zambia from January 2002 to his death."}
{"id": "21609", "revid": "1050767", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21609", "title": "Cherokee", "text": "The Cherokee (\"ah-ni-yv-wi-ya\" in Cherokee language) are Native Americans who at the time of European contact in the 16th century lived in the area that is now called the eastern and southeastern United States before most were forcefully moved to the Ozark hills. They were one of the tribes referred to as the Five Civilized Tribes.\nCherokee people did not live in tepees. They lived in houses made from wood. In the 19th century, a man named Sequoyah introduced a form of writing the Cherokee language. For this, he was awarded a medal.\nThe Cherokee tribe had two chiefs, a red and white chief. When the tribe was at war, the red chief would lead, and when there was peace within the tribe, the white chief would lead. Chief John Ross was the leader of the Cherokee tribe from 1818 until 1867. He lived in Georgia before being forced to move to the place now called Oklahoma. \nThere are three Cherokee tribes recognized by the U.S. government:"}
{"id": "21611", "revid": "1141870", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21611", "title": "Soup", "text": "A soup is a kind of food. People make soups by boiling things in water. Then they put the things they boiled into a bowl and eat them. Vegetables are in most soups. You can also put meat in soups. Soups that are thicker than normal, with more meat or vegetables, are stews. The liquid in soup is broth.\nTraditionally, soups are classified into two main groups: clear soups and thick soups. The traditional French types of clear soups are bouillon and consomm\u00e9. Thick soups are classified by the type of thickening agent used. Pur\u00e9es are vegetable soups thickened with starch. Bisques are made from pur\u00e9ed shellfish or vegetables thickened with cream. Cream soups may be thickened with b\u00e9chamel sauce; and velout\u00e9s are thickened with eggs, butter, and cream. Other ingredients commonly used to thicken soups and broths include egg, rice, lentils, flour, and grains. Many popular soups also include carrots and potatoes."}
{"id": "21612", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21612", "title": "1420s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21613", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21613", "title": "Hyderabad, India", "text": "Hyderabad (pronounced ( )) is the largest capital of the state of Telangana. At over 12.2 million, it has the largest population of any city in the state Hyderabad is an A-1 city under the terms of development priorities. It is also known as \"city of pearls\" or \"city of Nizams\". The people of Hyderabad are called \"Hyderabadis.\"\nHyderabad was founded in 1591\u00a0AD by Sultan Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah on the banks of river Musi. It was later ruled by the Mughal governor Nizam Asaf Jah I who then founded the Asaf Jahi Dynasty (Also known as The Nizams). There were a total of 10 Nizams with the last one being Osman Ali Khan, Asaf Jah VII.\nThe city is home to the Ramoji Film City which spans an area of over . The movieindustry here is called The \"Hyderabad Deccan Urdu\" film industry (also known as \"Deccanwood\").\nHistory.\nArchaeologists have found Iron Age sites in Hyderabad that are 2,500 years old. These sites have been found near Haythnagar and Ramoji Film City, and have burials and tools. The Qutub Shahi kings ruled Hyderabad till 1687 when the city was taken over by the Mughals. Muhammad Quli Qutub Shah was a Qutub Shahi ruler who ordered the construction of the Charminar as a mosque. Nawab Abdul Hassan Shah who is popularly known as Tanisha was the last Qutub Shahi ruler of Hyderabad before Aurangzeb captured it in 1687. Asaf Jah was declared the governor of Hyderabad by Aurangzeb. This is how the Asaf Jahi Dynasty began which ruled Hyderabad till 1948.\nHyderabad became a princely state in 1947 after collaboration with India. But soon the Nizam had to sign an Instrument of Accession to the Union of India so that Hyderabad becomes a part of India. On 1 November 1956, the province of Hyderabad was divided into Karnataka, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh on the basis of language. So, Hyderabad came into the Telugu speaking community and thus became the capital of Andhra Pradesh. The state of Telangana was formed on 2 June 2014 and separated from Andhra Pradesh retaining Hyderabad as it's capital.\nThe city has now developed in fields of IT with four IT colleges including JNTU (Jawaharlal Nehru's Technological University ). The rise of International Airport and real estate has a major impact on the development of Hyderabad.\nGeography.\nHyderabad is situated at the Deccan Plateau, 500\u00a0meters above the sea level and most of the area is rocky. Paddy is the main crop grown and other crops include Bengal gram, groundnut, sugar cane and sunflower. Hyderabad was found on the banks of Musi river in 1591. Today that area is known as old city where Mecca Masjid and Hussain Sagar Lake exist. The area has many official buildings and that area is very old. From the recent time, Hyderabad has been merged with Secunderabad. This has led a large, united and populous city with many villages surrounding it.\nClimate.\nHyderabad has a hot, wet and dry climate. The monsoon or rainy season is from late June until late October. On average, 32\u00a0inches of rain falls on the city each year. The highest temperature ever recorded was 51.5\u00a0\u00b0C (113.9\u00a0\u00b0F) on 2 June 1966. The lowest recorded temperature was 1.1\u00a0\u00b0C (43\u00a0\u00b0F) on 8 January 1946. It is cooler in the evenings and mornings because the city is high above sea level.\nPopulation.\nThe city has a population of over four million. Hindus form the majority while Muslims are 40% of the population. The Muslim community of Hyderabad is largest in Telangana. Muslims are mainly located in and around the old city. Christians are small in number in the city. Famous churches include those around Abids and Secunderabad like St. Joseph's Cathedral.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nCharminar is actually founded as a Mosque and later by archaeological department changed into a monument. Charminar has long been the icon of Hyderabad. The name means \"Four minarets\". The towers rise to a height of 48.7\u00a0m above the ground. There is a mosque with 45 prayer spaces in the upper storeys of the building.\nThe Golconda Fort was the capital of the Qutb Shahi kingdom. In the 16th century, it was the center of a busy diamond trade. The outer wall of the fort is 10\u00a0km around.\nMecca Masjid is one of the oldest mosques in the city. Muhammed Quli Qutub Shah began building it in 1617. Mughal emperor Aurangzeb finished the building in 1694. The mosque is made of granite. The main hall of the mosque is 75\u00a0feet high, 220\u00a0feet wide and 180\u00a0feet long. Ten thousand worshippers can fit inside at the same time. The entrance arches are made of single slabs of granite. It is believed that Muhammed Quli had bricks made from earth brought from Mecca. He used them the central arch of the mosque. This explains the name of the mosque.\nThe Chowmahalla Palace was Asaf Jahi dynasty capital. The Nizam entertained official guests and royal visitors here.\nNawab Viqar al-Umra built Falaknuma Palace in 1872. The palace includes sculptures by artists from Florence.\nLanguage.\nTelugu, Urdu and Hindi are mainly spoken in Hyderabad. English is also spoken among the educated people. The Telugu varies across the state but the language remains the same."}
{"id": "21614", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21614", "title": "Manmohan Singh", "text": "Manmohan Singh (Punjabi:\u0645\u0646\u0645\u0648\u06c1\u0646 \u0633\u0646\u06af\u06be/\u0a2e\u0a28\u0a2e\u0a4b\u0a39\u0a28 \u0a38\u0a3f\u0a70\u0a18;Hindi:\u092e\u0928\u092e\u094b\u0939\u0928 \u0938\u093f\u0902\u0939; born 26 September 1932) was the 13th Prime Minister of India. A famous economist, he is the only Prime Minister since Jawaharlal Nehru to return to power after completing a full five-year term, and the first Sikh to hold the office.\nSingh was born on 26 September 1932 in Gah, Punjab, British India, into a Sikh family. He studied at Panjab University, Chandigarh, at St John's College, Cambridge, and at Nuffield College, Oxford. Singh has been married to Gursharan Kaur since 1958."}
{"id": "21615", "revid": "1060941", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21615", "title": "Indira Gandhi", "text": "Indira Gandhi (19 November 1917 \u2013 31 October 1984) was an Indian politician. She was Prime Minister of India from 1966 to 1977. She was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, who was also Prime Minister of India. Her son, Rajiv Gandhi, later became Prime Minister of India. She married Feroze Gandhi, who was not related to the civil rights leader, Mahatma Gandhi.\nIndira Gandhi was the first woman prime minister of India. Gandhi was assassinated in 1984 at the age of 66. In 1938, Indira joined the Indian National Congress Party. After the death of Lal Bahadur Shastri in 1966, Indira Gandhi served as prime minister until India held the next election. She won that election in 1967 and became one of the first women elected to lead a democracy.\nIndira Gandhi was Prime Minister of India twice. She served the first time between 1966 and 1977 and the second time between 1980 and 1984. She also studied at the University of Oxford."}
{"id": "21616", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21616", "title": "Nintendo 64", "text": "The Nintendo 64 (commonly abbreviated N64) was the third home video game console released by Nintendo. It was first released in Japan in June 1996 and was meant to compete against the Sony PlayStation and the Sega Saturn. The Nintendo 64 was Nintendo's first console made for 3D graphics. It uses plastic cartridges instead of CDs or disks, making load times faster. Because of this, the games cost more to make. The controller for the Nintendo 64 was shaped like an \"M\" and had 10 buttons and a joystick. Sony used the N64 joystick design to make their DualShock PlayStation controller. Out of the box, the Nintendo 64 had 4 MB of RAM, and it could be upgraded to 8 MB with the expansion pak.\nBecause making games for the Nintendo 64 was more expensive than making games for the PlayStation, many video game companies chose develop for the Playstation instead. Nintendo also did not like games that had a lot of blood or violence in them. Companies who made these kinds of games made them for the PlayStation instead. However, some game makers did make some violent games for the Nintendo 64, such as Rare's first-person shooter \"Perfect Dark\". Nintendo lost its lead over Sega and Sony because of these two things. Production for the system ceased in Japan in 2002 and in 2003 worldwide.\nReception.\nIn 2015, IGN named the Nintendo 64 the ninth-greatest video game console of all time.\nSales.\n5.54\u00a0million Nintendo 64 units were sold in Japan, 20.63\u00a0million in the Americas, and 6.75\u00a0million in other regions, a total of 32.93\u00a0million units."}
{"id": "21623", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21623", "title": "Phobos", "text": "Phobos (Greek for \"fear\", is the root word of \"phobia\") is one of the sons of Ares and Aphrodite in Greek mythology and the twin brother of Deimos. He is known as the god of fear, panic, flight and battlefield rout. He went with his father into battle, driving his chariot and spreading fear in his path. As a son of Aphrodite, goddess of love, each twin also represented the fear of loss.\nThe larger and innermost of Mars' two moons was named after him, and the other was named after Deimos."}
{"id": "21625", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21625", "title": "Deimos", "text": "Deimos (; - \"dread\" or \"terror\") is the god of terror in Greek mythology. He is one of the sons of Ares and Aphrodite. He is the twin brother of Phobos, god of fear. He and his brother would often go with their father as he rode into battle in his chariot. Deimos, the smaller of Mars' two moons, is named after him. "}
{"id": "21629", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21629", "title": "Krakatoa", "text": "Krakatoa (Indonesian name: \"Krakatau\") is an active volcano in the Sunda Strait, Indonesia. There are many different ways the name has been spelled. The volcano has erupted repeatedly in known history. The best known of these events occurred in late August 1883.\nOn 22 December 2018 the central cone collapsed and caused a tsunami in the Sunda Strait. More than 400 people were killed.\nThe 1883 eruption.\nThe 1883 eruption ejected more than six cubic miles (25 cubic kilometers) of rock, ash, and pumice, and made the loudest sound ever recorded by human beings. The sound was heard as far away as Perth in Australia (3,500\u00a0km; 2,200\u00a0miles), and the island of Rodrigues near Mauritius (4,800\u00a0km; 3,000\u00a0miles). Many thousands of people were killed and injured by the eruption, mostly in the tsunami (giant wave) which followed the explosion.\nThe pressure wave from the final explosion was recorded on barographs around the world, which continued to register it up to 5\u00a0days after the explosion. The recordings show that the shock wave from the final explosion reverberated around the globe seven times.\nThe eruption destroyed two-thirds of what was then the island of Krakatoa. New eruptions at the volcano since 1927 have built a new island, called \"Anak Krakatau\" (child of Krakatoa)."}
{"id": "21630", "revid": "1152007", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21630", "title": "Goldfish", "text": "Goldfish (\"Carassius auratus\") are a species of domesticated fish. Goldfish are in the carp family. They were domesticated in China during the Tang Dynasty. Goldfish can reach up to 59 cm in size, and 3 kg in weight. However, most goldfish grow to only half that size. In captivity, goldfish can live for up to 30 years. In the aquarium, however, most will die earlier. This is because the aquarium is too small. Goldfish need a lot of space so they have room to swim and so the water does not get dirty too fast. \nGoldfish live best in temperatures between 10 degrees Celsius and 30 degrees Celsius.\nIt was once thought that goldfish have short memories, but scientists have proven that this is not true. In experiments, a goldfish was trained to kick a small ball under water. Another goldfish learned to swim through a maze.\nThere are many kinds of goldfish. The most common kind is golden-colored, but goldfish come in many different shapes and sizes. Many gold fish have fancy tails. Another common kind is called a black moor, which is black colored. Wild goldfish are called prussian carp and are silver-green in colour.\nHealth.\nGoldfish are very sensitive and should not be touched. This can hurt them and make them sick. They may also get other health problems. Their stomachs can fill with liquids (water). They can get sick because of bad bacteria. Some lose control of swimming because a special organ in their belly, called a swim bladder, gets sick and stops working. However, sick goldfishes can be cured with medicine. Pet shops or veterinarians can help goldfish get better when they are sick. One simple way to help a goldfish if it has indigestion is to feed it peas, as this will help their digestive tract work properly.\nNervous system.\nThe most anterior parts of a fish's brain are the olfactory bulbs. These connect to the two lobes of the cerebrum by stalks. The cerebrum is involved with the sense of smell. It also seems to control behaviors such as taking care of the young and exploring the natural environment. The optic lobes process information from the eyes. The cerebellum coordinates body movements. The medulla controls internal organ functions and helps maintains balance.\nFarther back in the brain is the spinal cord, which is the hollow dorsal nerve cord that chordates have. The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral column. Between each set of vertebrae, a pair of spinal nerves exits the cord and connects to the internal organs and muscles. Most fish have well designed sense organs. Chemoreceptors (chemical) are located all over the head and much of the body surface. Most fish have ears inside their heads, but they do not hear well. However, a series of pores connected to canals beneath the skin cover the head and the sides of their body. This system, called the lateral line system, detects movement.\nDigestive system.\nOnce food is in the goldfish\u2019s mouth, it\u2019s pushed to the back of the throat where a set of teeth grind and crush it. The ground down food passes down a tube called the oesophagus, which squeezes out excess water. The oesophagus is lined with taste buds and cells that produce mucus to keep things moving on. The oesophagus empties into an expandable section of the goldfish\u2019s digestive which is not to be confused with the stomach. It is simply a buffer zone to hold excess food as needed. Just before this expanded section, chemicals from the gallbladder and pancreas are pumped in with the food. The ones from the gallbladder make up bile, which is used to break down fats; the ones from the pancreas contain enzymes that are used to break down proteins. All along the digestive tract are cells that secrete enzymes that act on carbohydrates, breaking them down into sugars. From the expanded section to the goldfish\u2019s anus, lots of mucus is produced and as much useful material as possible is absorbed into the bloodstream to be used for energy, growth, protection and repair.\nRespiratory system.\nGoldfish get their oxygen from water. As a fish swims, it gulps up water. The water which has oxygen goes through an opening in the fish\u2019s throat that leads to the gills. Gills have many blood vessels within them. Oxygen moves from the water to the blood as the water flows over the gills. The blood vessels gather and store the oxygen that travels over the gills. At the same time, carbon dioxide moves out of the blood and into the water. Now, the water flows out of the slits beneath the gills. These gills are located under the operculum.\nCirculatory system.\nThe circulatory system of fish is responsible for transporting blood and nutrients throughout the body. Blood travels across the body through the network of blood vessels. Unlike humans, fish have single cycle circulation, where the oxygen-deprived blood comes to the heart, from where it is pumped to the gills and then circulated to the entire body. The circulatory system of fish consists of a heart, blood and blood vessels. The heart of a fish is a simple muscular structure that is located between the posterior gill arches. In most fish, the heart consists of an atrium, a ventricle, a sac-like thin walled structure known as sinus venosus and a tube, known as bulbus arteriosus. In spite of containing four parts, the heart of a fish is considered two-chambered. The blood contains plasma (the fluid portion of blood) and the blood cells. The red blood cells contain hemoglobin, a protein that facilitates the transport of oxygen to the entire body, while the white blood cells are an indispensable part of the immune system. The thrombocytes help in blood clotting. Blood is circulated throughout the body with the help of arteries and veins (blood vessels). The arteries are responsible for carrying oxygenated blood from the heart to the rest of the body, while the veins return deoxygenated blood from the different parts of the body to the heart.\nSkeletal and muscular systems.\nThe skeletal system of a goldfish is mainly to protect the goldfish, support its structure and leverage, and helps with its red blood cell production. A goldfish\u2019s skeletal system is made of almost all small bones and cartilage and it barely has any big bones. The bones are made of almost all calcium. There are 3 main muscles in a goldfish\u2019s muscular system, the tail and trunk muscles, the jaw muscles, and the fin muscles. In the tail and trunk muscles, there are myotomes which are muscles blocks and there are myosepta which are connective tissues that separate myotomes. The horizontal septum separates myotomes into two sections, ventral or dorsal. In the jaw muscles, the goldfish uses adductor muscles to close its jaw and abductor muscles to open its jaw. In a gold fish\u2019s fin muscles, there are also adductor and abductor muscles. These muscles move a gold fish\u2019s fins away from and close to its body. There are also erector muscles in the fins that help with the stability and flexibility of the fish\u2019s fins.\nMemory and intelligence.\nGoldfish have a memory-span of at least three months and can distinguish between different shapes, colors and sounds. With positive reinforcement, goldfish can be trained to recognize and treact to light signals of different colors or perform tricks. Fish learn to anticipate feedings provided they occur at around the same time every day."}
{"id": "21631", "revid": "1029984", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21631", "title": "Premature ejaculation", "text": "Premature ejaculation (also known as PE) is a condition affecting many men. It is when during sexual intercourse (sex) the male cannot stop himself from ejaculating after starting sex. The usual time from starting sex until ejaculation is about 4 to 8 minutes.\nTreatment exercises.\nThe condition is usually curable, or at least treatable with exercises. (There are more exercises than these, however, these are the most common.)\nStimulation treatment.\nOne exercise is to create an erection and begin to lose it, then stimulate it again. This exercise is best done alone at first and then with a partner. Thrusting should not be used with a partner until very near the end of treatment. This treatment may take several weeks to fully cure the problem if it is used properly. \nMuscular treatment.\nAnother treatment involves using the muscle which stops urine. To locate the muscle, simply begin urinating and stop quickly before emptying the bladder. Doing that will demonstrate how to use the muscle. Then whenever convenient use the muscle. You do not need to be urinating to use the muscle and it is suggested you are not. After a few weeks of both these treatments, the PE will become more like traditional ejaculation and after about one and a half to two and a half months, it should be absolutely normal."}
{"id": "21632", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21632", "title": "Tokio", "text": ""}
{"id": "21636", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21636", "title": "Premature Ejaculation", "text": ""}
{"id": "21637", "revid": "151447", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21637", "title": "Mars I", "text": ""}
{"id": "21638", "revid": "151449", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21638", "title": "Mars II", "text": ""}
{"id": "21639", "revid": "7844898", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21639", "title": "Witch", "text": "A witch is a person who practices witchcraft or magic. Traditionally, the word was used to accuse someone of bewitching someone, or casting a spell on them to gain control over them by magic. It is now also used by some to refer to those who practice various wise crafts such as Hedge witch. Witches usually used spells.\nHistory.\nAlthough most indigenous peoples throughout history have had some beliefs about spirits and people believed to have power through herbs or spirits, these were not called 'witches' until contact with western ideas. Neither did they always have negative connotations.\nIn Europe, the panic over witchcraft was supported by the \"Malleus Maleficarum\", published in 1487 by Heinrich Kramer, a German Catholic clergyman. It taught the prosecution of witches and was greatly promoted by the new technology of the printing press. It saw 29 printings before 1669, second only to the Bible. The book says that three elements are necessary for witchcraft. These are the evil intentions of the witch, the help of the Devil, and the permission of God.\nMany women in South America and throughout Europe were killed by witch hunts. The exact number is debated because of a lack of record keeping and different opinions on the time frames and regions that ought to be included. Since the entire persecuting legal system, \"judges, ministers, priests, constables, jailers, judges, doctors, prickers, torturers, jurors, executioners\" were nearly all male and the victims were overwhelmingly female, the witch hunts are considered by many to be a \"gynocide\". In the documentary \"The Burning Times\", Thea Jensen calls this period in history a \"Women's Holocaust\".\nModern understanding.\nIn the 20th century, a new attempt has been made at understanding witchcraft. Many people say that witches were in fact wise women who were hunted down by the church (mostly for their knowledge of herbs to treat certain diseases). This has led to a new movement. Some of it is known as Wicca.\nHeather Marsh has tied the persecution of witches to the fight of church and industry to control \"the power of life and death\" at a time when industry needed more workers. She also argues the persecution of witches was a fight for centralized power over the peasant rebellions and the ownership of knowledge by medicine and science which forbade the earlier teaching or practices by women and indigenous cultures. She writes that the persecution of witches has colored misogyny since the 1400s.\nSilvia Federici tied the witch hunts to a\u00a0history of the female body in the transition to capitalism.\nWitchcraft and accusations of witchcraft are still very common in some parts of West Africa.\nWitch crimes in the \"Malleus Maleficarum\".\nControl of procreation was a constant theme, as was medical knowledge:\n\"Concerning Witches who copulate with Devils. Why is it that Women are chiefly addicted to Evil superstitions?\"\n\"Whether Witches may work some Prestidigatory Illusion so that the Male Organ appears to be entirely removed and separate from the Body.\"\n\"That Witches who are Midwives in Various Ways Kill the Child Conceived in the Womb, and Procure an Abortion; or if they do not this Offer New-born Children to Devils.\"\n\"How Witches Impede and Prevent the Power of Procreation.\"\n\"How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Virile Member.\"\n\"Of the Manner whereby they Change Men into the Shapes of Beasts.\"\n\"Of the Method by which Devils through the Operations of Witches sometimes actually possess men.\"\n\"Of the Method by which they can Inflict Every Sort of Infirmity, generally Ills of the Graver Kind.\"\n\"Of the Way how in Particular they Afflict Men with Other Like Infirmities.\"\n\"How Witch Midwives commit most Horrid Crimes when they either Kill Children or Offer them to Devils in most Accursed Wise.\"\nFilm.\nHocus Pocus\nThe Wizard Of Oz"}
{"id": "21644", "revid": "445729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21644", "title": "1210s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21646", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21646", "title": "West Bank", "text": "The West Bank is a piece of land in the Middle East. It touches the Dead Sea and the River Jordan. The landscape is mostly hills or desert. The weather in the summer is hot and dry. It is cooler and rainy in the winter.\nRight now, the area is under the control of Israel. Some Israelis and other nations disagree on whose it really is.\nSince 1990 there are talks between the Israeli government and the Palestinians about what will happen in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in the future. Most people on the West Bank are Palestinians but there are also many Jewish settlers in settlements. There has been some controversy about these settlements.\nThe State of Palestine claims the West Bank with East Jerusalem included.\nThe West Bank is called \"Judea and Samaria Area\" by the Israeli government."}
{"id": "21647", "revid": "440431", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21647", "title": "Jan Hus", "text": "Jan Hus, or John Huss (c.1370 - 6 July 1415) was born in Husinec, Bohemia (now Czech Republic). He was a Bohemian religious thinker and reformer. He started a religious movement that was strongly influenced by the beliefs of British scholar, John Wycliffe.\nHus studied at the University of Prague. In about 1400, he became a Catholic priest, and was soon accepted a position of preaching in Czech, the language spoken in Bohemia. While preaching, he studied Wycliffe\u2019s writings, and came to like them, especially because of how authentic and real they were.\nIn 1403, Hus asked the church to undo the ban on Wycliffe's writings, and translated them into Czech. The church, led by archbishop Zbynek Zaj\u00edc, had different beliefs. In 1410, Zaj\u00edc ordered that Hus\u2019 writings be burned and Hus and his followers, the Hussites be forced out of the church. Hus was excommunicated in 1411, condemned by the Council of Constance, and burned at the stake on 6 July 1415, in Konstanz, Germany.\nWhen Hus was killed his followers revolted and fought against the Catholics until they were defeated in 1431.\nHus' teachings.\nMany of his teachings were later taken up by Martin Luther."}
{"id": "21648", "revid": "7796518", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21648", "title": "Konstanz", "text": "Konstanz (English often Constance) is a university town with a population of around 80,000, on the shore of Lake Constance in the south-west corner of Germany, bordering Switzerland. The history of the city goes back to Ancient Rome. In the 15th century, the Council of Constance was held there. This ended the Western Schism. Jan Hus was burned as a heretic at the council."}
{"id": "21649", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21649", "title": "Constance", "text": ""}
{"id": "21650", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21650", "title": "Bodensee", "text": ""}
{"id": "21655", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21655", "title": "Panther", "text": "Panther can mean\nAll these animals belong to the Felidae family."}
{"id": "21656", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21656", "title": "Instant messaging", "text": "Instant messaging (often shortened to IM) is a way of two or more people to communicate over a network. When the sender sends a message, this message is sent to all the recipients in the group. People use messaging clients to send and receive messages. The type of message supported depends on the specific client, and network. Most of the time, it is text. In some cases, images or other types of media is supported. \nInstant messaging services got many ideas from an older and still popular way to online chat named Internet Relay Chat (IRC). In early instant messaging programs, each letter appeared when it was typed and when letters were deleted to correct typos. These were also seen by the reader. This made it more like a telephone conversation than sending letters. In newer instant messaging programs, the other readers in the conversation generally only sees each line of text right after a new line is started. Most instant messaging programs have a way to set a status message. This works likes the message on a telephone answering machine. It shows whether or not people are online and want to chat.\nBenefits.\nInstant messaging offers real-time communication and allows easy collaboration, which might be considered more akin to genuine conversation than email's \"letter\" format. In contrast to e-mail, the parties know whether the peer is available. Most systems allow the user to set an \"online status\" or \"away message\" so peers are notified when the user is available, busy, or away from the computer. On the other hand, people are not forced to reply immediately to incoming messages. For this reason, some people consider communication via instant messaging to be less intrusive than communication via phone. However, not all popular systems allow the sending of messages to people not currently logged on (\"offline messages\"), thus removing much of the difference between IM and email.\nInstant messaging allows instantaneous communication between a number of parties simultaneously, by transmitting information quickly and efficiently, featuring immediate receipt of acknowledgment or reply. In certain cases IM involves additional features, which make it even more popular, i.e. to see the other party, e.g. by using ((web-cams)), or to talk directly for free over the internet.\nIt is possible to save a conversation to read later or look at again. Instant messages typically are may be logged in a local message history which closes the gap to the persistent nature of e-mails and facilitates quick exchange of information like URLs or document snippets (which can be unwieldy when communicated via telephone).\nPeople with an auditory or speech disability.\nInstant messaging opens new methods of spontaneous communication for people that have an impairment in hearing, auditory processing, or speech. It is considered by many a powerful way to allow equal opportunities in communication, without the aid of special devices or services designed for users with hearing loss.\nFriend-to-friend networks.\nInstant Messaging may be done in a Friend-to-friend network, in which each node connects to the friends on the friendslist. This allows to communicate to friends of friends and build chatrooms for instant messages with all friends on that network.\nBusiness application.\nInstant messaging has proven to be similar to personal computers, e-mail, and the WWW, in that its adoption for use as a business communications medium was driven primarily by individual employees using consumer software at work, rather than by formal mandate or provisioning by corporate information technology departments. Tens of millions of the consumer IM accounts in use are being used for business purposes by employees of companies and other organizations.\nIn response to the demand for business-grade IM and the need to ensure security and legal compliance, a new type of instant messaging, called \"Enterprise Instant Messaging\" (\"EIM\") was created when Lotus Software launched Lotus Sametime in 1999. Microsoft followed suit shortly thereafter with Microsoft Exchange Instant Messaging, and later created a new platform called Microsoft Office Live Communications Server. Since then, both IBM Lotus and Microsoft have introduced federation between their EIM systems and some of the public IM networks thus employees may use a single interface to both their internal EIM system and their buddies on AOL, MSN, and Yahoo!. Current leading EIM platforms include IBM Lotus Sametime, Microsoft Office Live Communications Server, and Jabber XCP .\nThe adoption of IM across corporate networks outside of the control of IT organizations creates many risks and liabilities for companies who do not effectively manage and support IM use. Companies implement specialized IM archiving and security products and services like those from Secure Computing, Akonix, Surfcontrol, and ScanSafe to mitigate these risks and provide safe, secure, productive instant messaging capabilities to their employees.\nRisks.\nAlthough instant messaging has many good things, it also has risks and liabilities, especially when used in \"workplaces\". Among these are:\nHackers' use of instant messaging networks to deliver malicious code has grown consistently from 2004 to the present, with the number of discrete attacks listed by the IM Security Center having grown 15% from 347 attacks in 2005 to 406 in 2006. Hackers use two methods of delivering malicious code through IM: delivery of virus, trojan, or spyware within an infected file, and the use of \"socially engineered\" text with a web address that entices the recipient to click on a URL that connects him or her to a website that then downloads malicious code. Viruses, worms, and trojans typically propagate by sending themselves rapidly through the infected user's buddy list. An effective attack using a \"poison URL\" may reach tens of thousands of people in minutes when each person's buddy list receives messages appearing to be from a trusted friend. The recipients click on the web address, and the entire cycle starts again. Infections may range from nuisance to criminal, and are becoming more sophisticated each year.\nIn addition to the malicious code threat, the use of instant messaging at work also creates a risk of non-compliance to laws and regulations governing the use of electronic communications in businesses. In the United States alone there are over 10,000 laws and regulations related to electronic messaging and records retention. The more well-known of these include the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, HIPAA, and SEC 17a-3. Recent changes to Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, effective December 1, 2006, create a new category for electronic records which may be requested during discovery (law) in legal proceedings. Most countries around the world also regulate the use of electronic messaging and electronic records retention in similar fashion to the United States. The most common regulations related to IM at work involve the need to produce archived business communications to satisfy government or judicial requests under law. Many instant messaging communications fall into the category of business communications that must be archived and retrievable.\nOrganizations of all types must protect themselves from the liability of their employees' inappropriate use of IM. The informal, immediate, and ostensibly anonymous nature of instant messaging makes it a candidate for abuse in the workplace. The topic of inappropriate IM use became front page news in October 2006 when Congressman Mark Foley resigned his seat after admitting sending offensive instant messages of a sexual nature to underage former House pages from his Congressional office PC. The Mark Foley Scandal led to media coverage and mainstream newspaper articles warning of the risks of inappropriate IM use in workplaces. In most countries, corporations have a legal responsibility to ensure harassment-free work environment for employees. The use of corporate-owned computers, networks, and software to harass an individual or spread inappropriate jokes or language creates a liability for not only the offender but also the employer. A survey by IM archiving and security provider Akonix Systems, Inc. in March 2007 showed that 31% of respondents had been harassed over IM at work. Companies now include instant messaging as an integral component of their policies on appropriate use of the World Wide Web, email, and other corporate assets.\nSecurity and archiving.\nIn the early 2000s, a new class of IT security provider emerged to provide remedies for the risks and liabilities faced by corporations who chose to use IM for business communications. The IM security providers created new products to be installed in corporate networks for the purpose of archiving, content-scanning, and security-scanning IM traffic moving in and out of the corporation. Similar to the e-mail filtering vendors, the IM security providers focus on the risks and liabilities described above.\nWith rapid adoption of IM in the workplace, demand for IM security products began to grow in the mid-2000s. By 2007, the preferred platform for the purchase of security software had become the \"appliance\", according to IDC, who estimate that by 2008, 80% of network security products will be delivered via an appliance."}
{"id": "21657", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21657", "title": "Instant messenger", "text": ""}
{"id": "21658", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21658", "title": "IM", "text": ""}
{"id": "21659", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21659", "title": "Im", "text": ""}
{"id": "21661", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21661", "title": "AOL", "text": "AOL Inc. (previously America Online) is a U.S.-based online service provider and Internet service provider. It has been in business since 1985. Important services in the early years were online chat and online games. Most connections were dial-up. In 2001 AOL bought Time Warner. In 2009 after a spin-off from Time Warner they changed their name to AOL Inc. It was announced in May 2015 that Verizon Communications purchased AOL.\nAOL Instant Messenger was a service which allowed users to communicate with any user currently online. AIM had millions of users worldwide. There were also other computer programs that could be used to talk with your AIM account, for example Trillian, Pidgin, Digsby, and AIM+. AIM was shut down on December 15, 2017.\nOther AOL products are AOL Spyware Protection, AOL Safety and Security Center, ICQ, AOl Computer Check-Up, AOL Explorer, AOL TopSpeed, AOL Dialer, AOL One-Click Fixes and AOL Openride."}
{"id": "21663", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21663", "title": "ISP", "text": ""}
{"id": "21665", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21665", "title": "Michelangelo Buonarroti", "text": ""}
{"id": "21670", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21670", "title": "Karl Gauss", "text": ""}
{"id": "21671", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21671", "title": "Karl Friedrich Gauss", "text": ""}
{"id": "21672", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21672", "title": "Carl Friedrich Gau\u00df", "text": ""}
{"id": "21674", "revid": "182305", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21674", "title": "Mailman", "text": "A mailman or mail carrier or postman is a person who brings people their postal mail. Normally he works for the post office of the respective country. Of course, there are also women doing this job. They are called mailwomen. For a layman, this occupation is called \"letter carriers\". \nFictional mailmen are traditionally shown as acting afraid of dogs, even to the point of shock."}
{"id": "21675", "revid": "6090795", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21675", "title": "Chinese postman problem", "text": "The Chinese postman problem is a mathematical problem of graph theory. It is also known as . Suppose there is a mailman who needs to deliver mail to a certain neighbourhood. The mailman is unwilling to walk far, so he wants to find the shortest route through the neighbourhood, that meets the following criteria:\nIf the graph travelled has an Eulerian path, this circuit is the ideal solution.\nAlan Goldman of the U.S. National Bureau of Standards first coined the name 'Chinese Postman Problem' for this problem, as it was originally studied by the Chinese mathematician Mei-Ku Kuan in 1962."}
{"id": "21677", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21677", "title": "Four color theorem", "text": "The four color theorem is a theorem of mathematics. It says that in any plane surface with regions in it (people think of them as maps), the regions can be colored with no more than four colors. Two regions that have a common border must not get the same color. They are called \"adjacent\" (next to each other) if they share a segment of the border, not just a point.\nThis was the first theorem to be proved by a computer, in a \"proof by exhaustion\". In proof by exhaustion, the conclusion is established by dividing it into cases, and proving each one separately. There may be a lot of cases. For example, the first proof of the four color theorem was a proof by exhaustion with 1,936 cases. This proof was controversial because most of the cases were checked by a computer program, not by hand. The shortest known proof of the four color theorem today still has over 600 cases.\nEven though the problem was first presented as a problem to color political maps of countries, mapmakers are not very interested in it. According to an article by the math historian Kenneth May , \u201cMaps utilizing only four colors are rare, and those that do usually require only three. Books on cartography and the history of map making do not mention the four-color property.\u201d\nMany simpler maps can be colored using three colors. The fourth color is needed for some maps, such as one in which one region is surrounded by an odd number of others, which touch each other in a cycle. One such example is given in the image. The five color theorem states that five colors are enough to color a map. It has a short, elementary proof and was proven in the late 19th century. Proving that four colors are all that is needed turned out to be much more difficult. Many false proofs and false counterexamples have appeared since the first statement of the four color theorem in 1852.\nExact formulation of the problem.\nIntuitively, the four color theorem can be stated as 'given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions, called a map, the regions can be colored using at most four colors so that no two regions which are adjacent have the same color'. To be able to correctly solve the problem, it is necessary to clarify some aspects: First, all points that belong to three or more countries must be ignored. Secondly, \"bizarre\" maps with regions of finite area and infinite perimeter can require more than four colors.\nFor the purpose of the theorem every \"country\" has to be a simply connected region, or contiguous.\nIn the real world, this is not true: Alaska as part of the United States, Nakhchivan as part of Azerbaijan, and Kaliningrad as part of Russia are not contiguous. Because the territory of a particular country must be the same color, four colors may not be enough. For instance, consider a simplified map, such as the one shown on the left: In this map, the two regions labeled \"A\" belong to the same country, and must be the same color. This map then requires five colors, since the two \"A\" regions together are contiguous with four other regions, each of which is contiguous with all the others. If \"A\" had only three regions, six or more colors might be needed. In this way, it is possible to make maps that need an arbitrarily high number of colors. A similar construction also applies if a single color is used for all bodies of water, as is usual on real maps.\nAn easier to state version of the theorem uses graph theory. The set of regions of a map can be represented more abstractly as an undirected graph that has a vertex for each region and an edge for every pair of regions that share a boundary segment. This graph is planar: it can be drawn in the plane without crossings by placing each vertex at an arbitrarily chosen location within the region to which it corresponds, and by drawing the edges as curves that lead without crossing within each region from the vertex location to each shared boundary point of the region. Conversely any planar graph can be formed from a map in this way. In graph-theoretic terminology, the four-color theorem states that the vertices of every planar graph can be colored with at most four colors so that no two adjacent vertices have the same color, or for short, \"every planar graph is four-colorable\" (; ).\nHistory.\nThe first person to name the problem was Francis Guthrie, in 1852. He was a law student in England, at the time. He found that he needed at least four colors to color a map of the counties of England. Augustus de Morgan first discussed the problem, in a letter he wrote to Rowan Hamliton in August 1852. In the letter, de Morgan asks whether four colors are really enough to color a map, such that countries that are next to each other get different colors. \nEnglish mathematician Arthur Cayley presented the problem to the mathematical society in London, in 1878. Within a year, Alfred Kempe found what looked like a proof of the problem. Eleven years later, in 1890, Percy Heawood showed that Alfred's proof was wrong. Peter Guthrie Tait presented another attempt at a proof in 1880. It took eleven years to show that Tait's proof did not work either. In 1891, Julius Petersen could show this. When he falsified Cayley's proof, Kempe also showed a proof for a problem he called Five color theorem. The theorem says that any such map can be colored with no more than five colors. There are two restrictions: First, any country is contiguous, there are no exclaves. The second restriction is that countries need to have a common border; if they only touch in a point, they can be colored with the same color. Even though Kempe's proof was wrong, he used some of the ideas which would later permit a correct proof. \nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Heinrich Heesch developed a first sketch of a proof by computer. Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken improved this sketch in 1976 . They were able to reduce the number of cases that would need to be tested to 1936; a later version was made that relied on testing only 1476 cases. Each case needed to be tested by a computer .\nIn 1996, Neil Robertson, Daniel Sanders, Paul Seymour and Robin Thomas improved the method, and reduced the number of cases to be tested to 663. Again, each case needed to be tested by computer. \nIn 2005, Georges Gonthier and Benjamin Werner developed a formal proof. This was an improvement, because it allowed to use theorem-proving software, for the first time. The software used is called Coq. \nThe four color theorem is the first big mathematical problem that was proved with the help of a computer. Because the proof cannot be done by a human, some mathematicians did not recognize it as correct. To verify the proof, it is necessary to rely on a correctly working software and hardware to validate the proof. Because the proof was done by computer, it is also not very elegant.\nAttempts that turned out to be wrong.\nThe four color theorem has been notorious for attracting a large number of false proofs and disproofs in its long history. At first, \"The New York Times\" refused to report on the Appel\u2013Haken proof. The newspaper did this as a matter of policy; it feared that the proof would be shown false like the ones before it . \nSome proofs took a long time, till they could be falsified: For Kempe's and Tait's proofs falsifying them took over a decade. \nThe simplest counterexamples generally try to create one region which touches all the others. This forces the remaining regions to be colored with only three colors. Because the four color theorem is true, this is always possible; however, because the person drawing the map is focused on the one large region, they do not notice that the remaining regions can in fact be colored with three colors.\nThis trick can be generalized: If the colors of some regions in a map are chosen beforehand, it becomes impossible to color the remaining regions in such a way that in total, only four colors are used. Someone verifying the counterexample may not think that it may be needed to change the color of these regions. This will make the counterexample look valid, even though it is not. \nPerhaps one effect underlying this common misconception is the fact that the color restriction is not transitive: a region only has to be colored differently from regions it touches directly, not regions touching regions that it touches. If this were the restriction, planar graphs would require arbitrarily large numbers of colors.\nOther false disproofs violate the assumptions of the theorem in unexpected ways, such as using a region that has multiple disconnected parts, or not allowing regions of the same color from touching at a point.\nColoring political maps.\nIn real life, many countries have exclaves or colonies. Since they belong to the country, they need to be colored with the same color as the parent country. This means that usually, more than four colors are needed to color such a map. When mathematicians talk about the graph associated with the problem, they say that is not planar. Even though it is easy to check if a graph is planar, finding the fewest number of colors needed to color it is very difficult. It is NP-complete, which is one of the most difficult problems that exist. The fewest number of colors needed to color a graph is known as its \"chromatic number\". Many of the problems that happen when trying to solve the four color theorem are related to discrete mathematics. For this reason, methods from algebraic topology are often used.\nExtension to \"non-flat\" maps.\nThe four color theorem requires the \"map\" to be on a flat surface, what mathematicians call a plane. In 1890, Percy John Heawood created what is called Heawood conjecture today: It asks the same question as the four color theorem, but for any topological object. As an example, a torus can be colored with at most seven colors. The Heawood conjecture gives a formula that works for all such objects, except the Klein bottle."}
{"id": "21678", "revid": "7139985", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21678", "title": "Theorem", "text": "A theorem is a proven idea in mathematics. Theorems are proved using logic and other theorems that have already been proved. A minor theorem that one must prove to prove a major theorem is called a lemma. Theorems are made of two parts: hypotheses and conclusions. \nTheorems use deduction, in contrast to theories which are empirical.\nSome theorems are trivial, since they directly follow from the propositions. Other theorems are called \"deep\", because their proof is long and difficult. Sometimes, such proofs involve other areas of mathematics or show connections between different areas. A theorem might be simple to state and yet be deep. An excellent example is Fermat's Last Theorem, and there are many other examples of simple yet deep theorems in number theory and combinatorics (among other areas). \nThere are other theorems for which a proof is known, but cannot be easily written down. Among the best examples are the four color theorem and the Kepler conjecture. Both of these theorems are only known to be true by reducing them to a computational search which is then verified by a computer program. At first, many mathematicians did not accept this form of proof, but it has become more widely accepted over the years. The mathematician Doron Zeilberger has even gone so far as to claim that these are possibly the only nontrivial results that mathematicians have ever proved. Many mathematical theorems can be reduced to simpler computations, including polynomial identities, trigonometric identities and hypergeometric identities."}
{"id": "21679", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21679", "title": "Triceratops", "text": "Triceratops was a huge herbivorous ceratopsid dinosaur from the late Cretaceous. Its name came from having three horns on its head. They were mainly found in North America. As adults, they grew up to 30 feet long by 9 feet tall (), and probably weighed around 5,400\u00a0kg (12,000\u00a0lb). Fully-grown, their skull was enormous (two meters long and nearly a meter wide). \n\"Triceratops\" was a low browser with a bony beak in front of its jaws. The jaws had close-set grinding teeth. Its defence had to stand up to attacks from taller theropods, hence the bony shield which covered its neck. Holes made by teeth have been found on the bony frill behind the horns, and on the sacrum (the part of the spine above the pelvis).\nMany fossils of \"Triceratops\" have been collected since the genus was first described in 1889. There is at least one complete individual skeleton. Paleontologist John Scannella observed: \"It is hard to walk out into the Hell Creek Formation and not stumble upon a \"Triceratops\" weathering out of a hillside\". Forty-seven complete or partial skulls were discovered in just that area during the decade 2000\u20132010. Specimens showing life stages from hatchling to adult have been found.\nBody.\nSize.\nIndividual \"Triceratops\" were about 7.9 to 9.0\u00a0m (26.0\u201329.5\u00a0ft) in length, 2.9 to 3.0\u00a0m (9.5\u20139.8\u00a0ft) in height, and 6.1\u201312.0\u00a0tonnes (13,000\u201326,000\u00a0lb) in weight.\nSkull.\nThe most distinctive feature is their large skull, among the largest of all land animals. The largest known skull (specimen BYU 12183) is estimated to have been in length when complete, and could reach almost a third of the length of the entire animal. It bore a single horn on the snout, above the nostrils, and a pair of horns approximately 1\u00a0m (3\u00a0ft) long, with one above each eye. Most other ceratopsids had large holes (fenestrae) in their frills, while those of \"Triceratops\" were noticeably solid.\nLimbs.\n\"Triceratops\" species were sturdy, with strong limbs and short three-hoofed hands and four-hoofed feet.\nThe posture of these dinosaurs has long been the subject of some debate. Originally, it was believed that the front legs of the animal had to be sprawling at angles from the thorax, in order to better bear the weight of the head. This stance can be seen in paintings by Charles Knight and Rudolph Zallinger. However, evidence of trackways, and reconstructions of skeletons show that \"Triceratops\" and other ceratopsids had an upright stance during normal locomotion, with the elbows flexed and slightly bowed out. The stance was intermediate between fully upright and fully sprawling, similar the modern rhinoceros.\nPaleobiology.\nAlthough \"Triceratops\" are commonly portrayed as herd animals, there is little evidence that they lived in herds.\nIn 2012, a group of three \"Triceratops\" in relatively complete condition, each of varying sizes from a full-grown adult to a small juvenile, were found in Wyoming, near Newcastle. The remains are currently under excavation by paleontologist Peter Larson and a team from the Black Hills Institute. It is believed that the animals were traveling as a family unit, but it remains unknown if the group consists of a mated pair and their offspring, or two females and a juvenile they were caring for. The remains also show signs of predation or scavenging from \"Tyrannosaurus\", particularly on the largest specimen, with the bones of the front limbs showing breakage and puncture wounds from \"Tyrannosaurus\" teeth.\nFor many years, \"Triceratops\" finds were known only from solitary individuals. These remains are very common: one palaeontologist reported having seen 200\u00a0specimens of \"T. prorsus\" in the Hell Creek Formation of Montana, U.S. Similarly, Barnum Brown claimed to have seen over 500\u00a0skulls in the field. \"Triceratops\" teeth, horn fragments, frill fragments, and other skull fragments are abundant fossils in the latest Upper Cretaceous of western North America. It was the most dominant herbivore of the time. In 1986, Robert Bakker estimated it as making up 5/6ths of the large dinosaur fauna at the end of the Cretaceous.\n\"Triceratops\" was one of the last ceratopsian genera to appear before the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. The related \"Torosaurus\", and the more distantly related diminutive \"Leptoceratops\", were also present, though their remains are rarely found.\nDentition and diet.\n\"Triceratops\" were herbivorous, and because of their low head, their primary food was probably low growth, although they may have been able to knock down taller plants with their horns, beak, and bulk. The jaws were tipped with a deep, narrow beak, good for grasping and plucking.\n\"Triceratops\" teeth were arranged in groups called batteries, of 36 to 40 tooth columns, in each side of each jaw with 3 to 5 stacked teeth per column, depending on the size of the animal. This gives a range of 432 to 800 teeth, of which only a fraction were in use at any given time (tooth replacement was continuous and occurred throughout the life of the animal). The great size and numerous teeth of \"Triceratops\" suggests that they ate large volumes of fibrous plant material, such as palms and cycads.\nFunctions of the horns and frill.\nThere has been much speculation over the functions of \"Triceratops\"' head adornments. The two main theories have revolved around use in combat, or display in courtship, with the latter thought now to be the most likely primary function.\n\"Triceratops\" were long thought to have used their horns and frills in combat with predators such as \"Tyrannosaurus\". The idea was discussed first in 1917 and again 70 years later by Robert Bakker. There is evidence that \"Tyrannosaurus\" did have aggressive head-on encounters with \"Triceratops\", based on partially healed tyrannosaur tooth marks on a \"Triceratops\" brow horn and squamosal; the bitten horn is also broken, with new bone growth after the break. Since the \"Triceratops\" wounds healed, the \"Triceratops\" survived the encounter. \"Tyrannosaurus\" is also known to have fed on \"Triceratops\". Evidence for this includes a heavily tooth-scored \"Triceratops\" ilium and sacrum.\nIn addition to combat with predators using horns, \"Triceratops\" are classically shown engaging each other in combat with horns locked. While studies show that such activity would be feasible, if unlike that of present-day horned animals, there is disagreement about whether they did so.\nThe large frill also may have helped to increase body area to regulate body temperature. A similar theory has been proposed regarding the plates of \"Stegosaurus\", although this use alone would not account for the bizarre and extravagant variation seen in different members of the Ceratopsidae. This observation is highly suggestive of what is now believed to be the primary function, display.\nThe theory of their use in sexual display was first proposed by Davitashvili in 1961 and has gained increasing acceptance since. Evidence that visual display was important, either in courtship or in other social behavior, can be seen in the fact that horned dinosaurs differ markedly in their adornments, making each species highly distinctive. Also, modern living creatures with such displays of horns and adornments use them in similar behavior. A 2006 study of the smallest \"Triceratops\" skull, ascertained to be a juvenile, shows the frill and horns developed at a very early age, predating sexual development and thus probably important for visual communication and species recognition in general.\nPaleopathology.\nOne skull, assigned to \"Triceratops\", has a hole in the jugal bone. It looks like a puncture wound sustained while the animal was still alive. This is supported by signs of healing that are present in the bone around the supposed wound. When examined closely, the hole in the bone has a diameter that is very similar to diameter of the distal end of a \"Triceratops\" horn. This is evidence of competition between individual dinosaurs."}
{"id": "21681", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21681", "title": "Factorisation", "text": ""}
{"id": "21682", "revid": "24306", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21682", "title": "Border", "text": "The border between two regions is a line, where one region is next to the other. If the regions are countries, the border can only be crossed at certain points. To cross the border, a passport or a visa might be necessary; such as the Wagah border between Pakistan and the Republic of India."}
{"id": "21683", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21683", "title": "Genus", "text": "A genus is a rank in the biological classification (or taxonomy). It is above species, and below families. A genus can include more than one species. When biologists talk about a genus, they mean one or more species of animals or plants that are closely related to each other.\nAs with other taxa, the plural is different from other English words because it is a Latin word. 'Genus' is the singular, and 'genera' is the plural form of the word.\nWhen printing the scientific name of an organism, the name is \"always in italic\". A name of species has two parts, with the genus first. For example, in \"\"Felis silvestris\", \"Felis\" is the genus. The genus name always begins with a capital letter. In \"Felis silvestris catus\"\", the third word is the subspecies, which is not often used.\nAs a common word.\nIn writing, genus names in Latin may be 'anglicised' to form a common name. For example, the genus \"Pseudomonas\" is \"pseudomonad\" (plural: \"pseudomonads\"). In practice, most really common animals and plants already have a common name. So instead of saying 'felids', or 'felines', one says 'cats' both for the family pet, and for all the cat family (Felidae)."}
{"id": "21684", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21684", "title": "Cretaceous", "text": "The Cretaceous period is the ninth and longest period in the Phanerozoic eon, lasting 80 million years from 145 to 65 million years ago (mya). It followed the Jurassic period, and is the third and last period of the Mesozoic era. After it came the Cainozoic era. \nThough famous for its land fauna, the Cretaceous sea level rose much higher than today. North America was partly covered by an epicontinental inland sea, and half of Britain was under water.\nIn the Upper Cretaceous, chalk, a type of limestone, was laid down in warm shallow seas. Chalk is 95% to 99% made up of coccoliths, the calcium carbonate (CaCO3) plates which tiny single-celled algae (coccolithophorids) produce.\nAt its end came the famous meteorite strike which, with the volcanic flood basalts spewed out in the Deccan Plateau (India), ended so many of the dominant life-forms: see K/T extinction event.\nThe Cretaceous period has just two very long epochs:\nThe Lower Cretaceous at ~45 million years, is the longest epoch in the Phanerozoic eon."}
{"id": "21685", "revid": "2906", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21685", "title": "Factiorisation", "text": ""}
{"id": "21688", "revid": "177123", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21688", "title": "Whole number", "text": ""}
{"id": "21689", "revid": "340366", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21689", "title": "Textbook", "text": "A textbook is a book used for the study of a subject. People use a textbook to learn facts and methods about a certain subject. Textbooks sometimes have questions to test the knowledge and understanding of the learner.\nA workbook is a type of textbook that has only practice questions and exercises. Workbooks are designed not to teach but to provide practice and to highlight areas which need more learning. A revision guide is a type of textbook that is used to remind the learner about the subject and give him/her extra practice, especially before an examination.\nA textbook is usually lent to students by a school to accompany a course the school is teaching. Sometimes, especially at university, students have to buy the textbooks they need themselves or borrow them from a library.\nMost textbooks are only published in printed format. However, some are now available online as electronic books."}
{"id": "21690", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21690", "title": "Axiom", "text": "An axiom is a concept in logic. It is a statement which is assumed to be true without question, and which does not require proof. It is also known as a postulate (as in the parallel postulate). The axiom is to be used as the premise or starting point for further reasoning or arguments, usually in logic or in mathematics.\nThis means it cannot be proved within the discussion of a problem. So inside some discussion, it is thought to be true. There are many reasons why it has no proof. For example,\nLogic can be used to find theorems from the axioms. Then those theorems can be used to make more theorems. This is often how math works. Axioms are important because logical arguments start with them.\nEuclid's axioms.\nEuclid of Alexandria was a Greek mathematician. Around the year 300 BC, he made the earliest list of axioms which we know of. The following are just a few of them:"}
{"id": "21692", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21692", "title": "Sovereign", "text": ""}
{"id": "21693", "revid": "764727", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21693", "title": "Set", "text": "A set is an idea from mathematics. A set has \"members\" (also called \"elements\"). A set is defined by its members, so any two sets with the same members are the same (e.g., if set formula_1 and set formula_2 have the same members, then \"formula_3\"). \nA set cannot have the same member more than once. Membership is the only thing that matters. For example, there is no order or other difference among the members. \"Anything\" can be a member of a set, including sets themselves (though if a set is a member of itself, paradoxes such as Russell's paradox can happen).\nWhat to do with sets.\nImagine the set is a bag.\nElement of.\nVarious things can be put into a bag. Later on, a good question would be if a certain thing is in the bag. Mathematicians call this \"element of\". Something is an element of a set, if that thing can be found in the respective bag. The symbol used for this is formula_4:\nformula_5,\nwhich means that formula_6 is in the bag formula_7 or formula_6 is an element of formula_7.\nUnlike a bag, a set can contain at most one item of a given type. So for a set of fruits, it would make no difference if there is one orange, or if there are 10 oranges. \nEmpty set.\nLike a bag, a set can also be \"empty\". The empty set is like an empty bag: it has nothing in it. The \"empty set\" is also called the \"null set\" and is represented by the symbol formula_10. \nUniverse.\nIf we consider, say, some sets of American cars, e.g. a set of all Fords and a set of all Dodges, we may also wish to consider the whole set of American cars. In this case, the set of all American cars would be called a universe. \nIn other words, a universe is a collection of all the elements one wishes to consider in a given problem. The universe is usually named formula_11.\nComparing sets.\nTwo sets can be compared. This is like looking into two different bags. If they contain the same things, they are equal. No matter, in which order these things are. \n\"For example\", if formula_12 and formula_13, the sets are the same.\nCardinality of a set.\nWhen mathematicians talk about a set, they sometimes want to know how big a set is (or what is the cardinality of the set). They do this by counting how many elements are in the set (how many items are in the bag). For finite sets the cardinality is a simple number. The empty set has a cardinality of 0. The set formula_14 has a cardinality of 2.\nTwo sets have the same cardinality if we can pair up their elements\u2014if we can join two elements, one from each set. The set formula_14 and the set formula_16 have the same cardinality. E.g, we could pair \"apple\" with \"sun\", and \"orange\" with \"moon\". The order does not matter. It is possible to pair all the elements, and none is left out. But the set formula_17 and the set formula_18 have different cardinality. \nIf we try to pair them up, we always leave out one animal.\nInfinite cardinality.\nAt times cardinality is not a number. Sometimes a set has infinite cardinality. The set of all integers is a set with infinite cardinality. Some sets with infinite cardinality are bigger (have a bigger cardinality) than others. There are more real numbers than there are natural numbers, for example, which means we cannot pair up the set of integers and the set of real numbers, even if we worked forever. \nCountability.\nIf you can count the elements of a set, it is called a countable set. Countable sets include all sets with a finite number of members. Countable sets also include some infinite sets, such as the natural numbers. You can count the natural numbers with formula_19. The natural numbers are nicknamed \"the counting numbers\", since they are what we usually use to count things with.\nAn uncountable set is an infinite set that is impossible to count. If we try to count the elements, we will always skip some. It does not matter what step we take. The set of real numbers is an uncountable set. There are many other uncountable sets, even such a small interval like formula_20.[3] \nSubsets.\nIf you look at the set formula_21 and the set formula_22, you can see that all elements in the first set are also in the second set.&lt;br&gt; We say: formula_23 is a subset of formula_24&lt;br&gt;\nAs a formula it looks like this:&lt;br&gt;\nformula_25\nIn general, when all elements of set formula_26 are also elements of set formula_27, we call formula_26 a subset of formula_27:&lt;br&gt;\nformula_30.&lt;br&gt;\nIt is usually read \"formula_26 is contained in formula_27.\"\n\"Example:\" Every Chevrolet is an American car. So the set of all Chevrolets is contained in the set of all American cars.\nSet operations.\nThere are different ways to combine sets.\nIntersections.\nThe intersection formula_33 of two sets formula_26 and formula_27 is a set that contains all the elements that are both in set formula_26 and in set formula_27 at the same time.&lt;br&gt;\n\"Example:\" When formula_26 is the set of all cheap cars, and formula_27 is the set of all American cars, then formula_33 is the set of all cheap American cars.\nUnions.\nThe union formula_41 of two sets formula_26 and formula_27 is a set that contains all the elements that are in set formula_26 or in set formula_27.\nThis \"or\" is the \"inclusive\" disjunction, so the union also contains the elements, that are in set formula_26 \"and\" in set formula_27.\nBy the way, this means, that the intersection is a subset of the union:\nformula_48.\n\"Example:\" When formula_26 is the set of all cheap cars, and formula_27 is the set of all American cars, then formula_41 is the set of all cars, without all expensive cars that are not from America.\nComplements.\nComplement can mean two different things:\nformula_55 &lt;br&gt;\nThe universe formula_11 is the set of all things you speak about.&lt;br&gt;\n\"Example:\" When formula_11 is the set of all cars, and formula_26 is the set of all cheap cars,&lt;br&gt; then formula_26C is the set of all expensive cars.\nformula_64&lt;br&gt;\nIt is also called the relative complement of formula_26 in formula_27 .&lt;br&gt;\n\"Example:\" When formula_26 is the set of all cheap cars, and formula_27 is the set of all American cars, then formula_64 is the set of all expensive American cars.\nIf you exchange the sets in the set difference, the result is different:&lt;br&gt;In the \"example\" with the cars, the difference formula_70 is the set of all cheap cars, that are not made in America.\nNotation.\nMost mathematicians use uppercase \"ITALIC\" (usually Roman) letters to write about sets (such as formula_26, formula_27, formula_73). The things that are seen as elements of sets are usually written with lowercase Roman letters.\nOne way of showing a set is by a list of its members, separated by commas, included in braces.\n\"For example\", \nAnother way, called the set-builder notation, is by a statement of what is true of the members of the set, like this:\nIn spoken English, this reads: \"the set of all \"x\" such that \"x\" is a natural number and \"x\" is less than four\". The symbol [ipe \"|\" means \"such that\" or \"so that\".\nThe empty set is written in a special way: formula_75, formula_76 or formula_77.\nWhen object \"a\" is the member of set formula_26 it is written as:\nIn spoken English, this reads: \"\"a\" is a member of formula_26\".\nVenn diagrams.\nTo illustrate operations on sets mathematicians use Venn diagrams. Venn diagrams use circles to show individual sets. The universe is depicted with a rectangle. Results of operations are shown as colored areas. In the illustration of the intersection operation the left circle shows set formula_26 and the right circle shows set formula_27.\nSpecial sets.\nSome sets are very important to mathematics. They are used very often. One of these is the \"empty set\". \nMany of these special sets are written using blackboard bold typeface, and these include:\nEach of these sets of numbers has an infinite number of elements, and formula_98. \nParadoxes about sets.\nThe mathematician Bertrand Russell found that there are problems with the informal definition of sets. He stated this in a paradox called \"Russell's paradox\". An easier to understand version, closer to real life, is called the \"Barber paradox\".\nThe barber paradox.\nThere is a small town somewhere. In that town, there is a barber. All the men in the town do not like beards, so they either shave themselves, or they go to the barber shop to be shaved by the barber.\nWe can therefore make a statement about the barber himself: \"The barber shaves all men that do not shave themselves. He only shaves those men (since the others shave themselves and do not need a barber to give them a shave).\"\nThis of course raises the question: What does the barber do each morning to look clean-shaven? This is the paradox.\nIf the barber shaves himself, he cannot be a barber, since a barber does not shave himself.\nIf he does not shave himself, he falls in the category of those who do not shave themselves, and so, cannot be a barber.\nFurther reading.\nThe following books explore sets in more detail:"}
{"id": "21695", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21695", "title": "Serfs", "text": ""}
{"id": "21696", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21696", "title": "Maldives", "text": "The Maldives are a group of islands in the Indian Ocean. They are southwest of India. They are made up of the Maldive and Suadive archipelagos, with over 1,200 islands. These islands are a part of 26 atolls. And they are divided to 20 administrative atolls. People live on about 200 of the islands. It has more than 1126 coral reefs. It is the flattest country in the world. The highest point in the Maldives is only high above the level of the sea.\nMal\u00e9 is the capital, with a population of 150,000 people. Its official religion is Islam. \nClimate.\nThe Maldives has a tropical monsoon climate (Am) under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, which is affected by the large landmass of South Asia to the north. Because the Maldives has the lowest elevation of any country in the world, the temperature is constantly hot and often humid. The presence of this landmass causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon. Two seasons dominate Maldives' weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern monsoon and the rainy season which brings strong winds and storms.\nThe shift from the dry northeast monsoon to the moist southwest monsoon occurs during April and May. During this period, the southwest winds contribute to the formation of the southwest monsoon, which reaches Maldives in the beginning of June and lasts until the end of August. However, the weather patterns of Maldives do not always conform to the monsoon patterns of South Asia. The annual rainfall averages in the north and in the south.\nThe monsoonal influence is greater in the north of the Maldives than in the south, more influenced by the equatorial currents.\nThe highest temperature ever recorded in Mal\u00e9 was 39.6\u00a0\u00b0C (103.3\u00a0\u00b0F) on 1 January 2000 and the lowest was 20.4\u00a0\u00b0C (68.7\u00a0\u00b0F) on 20 March 1989 and 21 January 2017."}
{"id": "21697", "revid": "995597", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21697", "title": "Prime Minister of Australia", "text": "The prime minister of Australia is the head of the executive branch of the government of Australia. The prime minister leads the cabinet of Australia and is the highest ranking minister of the Crown in the federal parliament. The prime minister is appointed by the monarch, who is advised by the governor general.\nThe current prime minister of Australia, since August 2018, is Scott Morrison.\nFormer prime ministers.\nAs of , there are six living former Australian Prime Ministers."}
{"id": "21698", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21698", "title": "1190s", "text": ""}
{"id": "21702", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21702", "title": "Structure", "text": " \nIn science, structure is a fundamental concept. It means the arrangement of parts. Examples are the organs in a body, or crystals in a substance like granite. \nA structure may refer to buildings, machines and similar things made by people as well as to a rock or a mineral, atoms or sentences. It always reflects the hierarchy of its parts. "}
{"id": "21704", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21704", "title": "Hardcore punk", "text": "Hardcore punk (or hardcore) is a style of punk music that usually sounds louder, faster and more angry than earlier punk rock music from the 1970s. Hardcore began in the late 1970s. Some of the important bands of the genre are Bad Brains, Black Flag, D.O.A, Minor Threat and Cro-Mags. Hardcore songs often have more political lyrics (words) than songs from 1970s punk.\nNo one is quite sure where the term \"hardcore punk\" came from. The band D.O.A. may have helped to make the term more popular with the title of their album \"Hardcore '81\" in 1981.\nThe first hardcore punk song was \"Out of Vogue\" by the Santa Ana band The Middle Class. This band started to play a loud type of punk with shouted words.\nPeople in hardcore punk bands and people who listened to hardcore punk wore clothes that were of two types. Some people wore clothes and hairstyles that were strange and a bit scary, like Mohawk hairstyles and leather jackets with metal studs. Other people wore regular clothes like black pants and T-shirts.\nAt hardcore punk concerts, people did a type of dancing called moshing. This type of dance involves people pushing each other and jumping off the stage.\nIn the early 1980s, hardcore bands from England began to get noticed, such as Discharge, The Exploited, and The Varukers. Discharge played with a sound that included heavy metal guitar styles.\nHardcore led to the creation of the straight edge movement. People who are straight edge do not use alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. Straight edge led to two new groups, called hardline and youth crew. Hardcore musicians also created independent record labels in the 1980s.\nMany bands had a \"Do it Yourself\" (DIY) attitude. Bands would record their own albums using simple four-track recorders, and the sell the records themselves at shows or through the mail. Hardcore influenced the creation of new styles of music, including alternative rock, grunge, alternative metal, metalcore, thrash metal and post-hardcore.\nPolitics.\nMany early hardcore punk bands had songs about liberal politics such as anarchism and socialism. They spoke against political leaders, such as American president Ronald Reagan and British prime minister Margaret Thatcher. While George W. Bush was President of the United States, a number of hardcore bands criticized him.\nA small number of hardcore musicians have expressed right wing views, including the band Antiseen, whose guitarist Joe Young ran for office as a Libertarian in North Carolina. Former Misfits singer Michale Graves supported George W. Bush.\nHow it sounds.\nHardcore band singers often sing by shouting the words of the song. Hardcore songs often sound like the singer is angry.\nHardcore bands use electric guitars, electric bass guitar, drums, and a singer. The electric guitars in hardcore bands are distorted, noisy, and fuzzy because the guitarists are using electronic boxes called distortion pedals. Some hardcore guitarists have changed the tuning of their guitar strings so they play notes that are lower than those a normal guitar can play.\nThe drums in hardcore music play loud and fast, often characterized by use of the double-bass pedal, particularly notable in the breakdowns."}
{"id": "21709", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21709", "title": "Limestone", "text": "Limestone is a sedimentary rock, made up mostly of the mineral calcite, a form of calcium carbonate, CaCO3.\nThe calcium carbonate is originally produced by living organisms. Later, some of it goes into solution in sea water. Limestone rocks include mainly organic remains and precipitated carbonate.\nLimestone is about 10% of the total volume of all sedimentary rocks.\nFormation.\nLimestones are mostly made of calcium carbonate. It is originally made by small photosynthetic protists like certain bacteria, coccolithophores, and algae. Then the carbonate gets used by various animals, like bivalves and the polyps which make coral reefs. They build their shells or framework out of CaCO3 crystals. \nCarbonates are rocks formed from these sources, plus any CaCO3 which is precipitated out of solution. Some carbonate dissolves in the water. It gets precipitated when the physical condition of the water changes. For example, if the concentration of CaCO3 is high, then a temperature drop, or a pH (acidity) change, can cause precipitation.\nFlorida Bay.\nFlorida Bay, the shallow lagoon behind the Florida Keys, is a model for the conditions which produced limestones on the continental shelf. Of course, all the species were somewhat different then but, as an ecosystem, it is similar.\nIn Florida Bay there is a lot of a type of flowering plant called sea grass. There is also a lot of white, milky water full of calcium carbonate. This is mainly formed by \"Melobesia\", a small red alga which lives on the sea grass.p151 Finally, the organisms produce huge amounts of slime, which is a polysaccharide. There is good reason to think the slime is produced by microorganisms to control the way their carbonate skeletons are formed.p139 As a side-effect the slime limits the amount of carbonate which goes into solution.p155\nFlorida Bay is a flat platform which has laid down a huge amount of carbonate rock. \nFossiliferous limestones.\nMany limestones contain fossils, and some are made up almost entirely of skeletal material. Chalk is ~99% coccoliths; Solnhofen limestone is famous for its animal fossils; and there are many shelly limestones from different periods. Limestone is not found much before the Cambrian period, because shelled animals had not yet evolved.\nMarble.\nWhen limestone is heated to a high temperature, and squeezed at the base of a mountain, it recrystallizes into the metamorphic rock marble. Marbles are fairly dense, relatively easy to cut, or be shaped into blocks, and some forms are white in colour.\nUses.\nLimestone is hard enough to resist weathering but usually soft enough to be worked (cut and carved) by stonemasons. It is used for building material. Limestone, particularly Portland limestone, became popular in the 19th and 20th centuries for building things such as churches, banks and houses. However, acid rain does slowly erode limestone.\nLimestone is used to make glass and cement. It is also used to make iron in a blast furnace, to remove impurities from the iron ore."}
{"id": "21710", "revid": "1118810", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21710", "title": "Root", "text": "The roots of a plant is the part that is usually buried in the soil. Roots are usually always under the soil, though\u2013sometimes roots can be above the ground. This is called an aerial root.\nAlso, stems can sometimes be under the soil (potatoes, for example). Roots do not have leaves, and are different from stems inside.\nPlants need their roots especially for three reasons: The roots take water and nutrients, a sort of food, from the soil. They also often store this food. And they fix the plants to the ground.\nHowever, most plant roots do not work at their best unless they have help from fungi. The symbiosis between roots and fungus is known as mycorrhiza.\nThere are two sorts of root systems:\nSome roots go very deep into the ground. One root that was found in Arizona, USA, was 60\u00a0m below the surface.\nRoots are also very strong. Some tree roots can destroy stones. Roots are not green because the cells have no chlorophyll.\nRoot growth.\nRoots grow through the whole life of the plant. They grow longer from the tip, adding cells to the end of each root. The root adds cells to their tips, and they grow fatter as they add cells around their tube-like bodies.\nAt the tip of each root, there is a small group of tough, dead, hard cells called the \"root cap\". The root cap is the strongest part of the root tip, and its job is to push its way through the dirt to look for moisture and nutrients and protect the plant.\nAerial roots.\nRoots are usually found underground, but in some cases this is not so. In the rainforest, the air is warm and humid (it has a lot of water). Some rainforest plants, known as epiphytes, grow right on trees. Their roots hang down in the air or running into the moss growing on the trees. Many aerial roots, are used to receive water and nutrient intake directly from the air, from fog, dew or humid air.\nSome trees have roots that are above the ground \"and\" underground. Mangrove trees have aerial roots (roots which come up into the air). They exchange gases with the atmosphere, just as leaves do. They are an adaptation to the poor level of oxygen in the waterlogged soil of the mangrove swamp.\nThe banyan tree has a root system that is underground, but it also has roots that start in its branches and grow down towards the ground. These roots not only take in water and nutrients from the soil, but they also help to support the long branches of the banyan tree. Because of this extra support, banyan tree branches can be really long. A banyantree in Lahaina, Maui, which was planted in 1873 by a man named William Owen Smith, has branches that are so long that this single tree covers a full square block in the city.\nMuch about aerial roots is still unknown.\nRoot systems.\nThere are two main kinds of roots systems: \"taproot systems\" and \"fibrous root systems\". A taproot system has one thick main root growing down from the plant's stem, and lots of smaller \"secondary roots\" branching off from this. A taproot system is usually deeper than it is wide. Often, we eat taproots, like carrots and turnips.\nA \"fibrous root system\" has lots of roots growing in many directions. There is not one main root. A fibrous root system is usually wider than deep.\nRoot pumping.\nIt has been usually assumed that in regular (non-aerial) terrestrial roots, the nutrients are pumped in together with the water, and that water is pumped into the roots by osmosis. Recent studies in large trees such as the Giant Sequoia, showed, that much of the pumping power, after initial growth, is received by hydraulic suction, due to transpiration - water evaporation from the leaves, in addition to the strong capillary action in the plant's branching xylem in the stem and leaves."}
{"id": "21713", "revid": "845104", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21713", "title": "Demo", "text": "Demo may mean one of the following:"}
{"id": "21715", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21715", "title": "Demo (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "21716", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21716", "title": "Demo (version)", "text": ""}
{"id": "21717", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21717", "title": "Piero Gobetti", "text": "Piero Gobetti (; June 19, 1901, Turin \u2013 February 15, 1926, Neuilly-sur-Seine) was a young journalist, intellectual, and radical liberal person. He was a very active critic during the years of crisis in Italy after the First World War and during the early years of Fascist rule. He had to leave Italy and settled down in Paris, where he soon died. He died because his health was bad, after the Fascists had terrorized him."}
{"id": "21719", "revid": "2131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21719", "title": "Coastguard", "text": ""}
{"id": "21720", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21720", "title": "Manama", "text": "Manama is the capital city of Bahrain. It is also the largest city in Bahrain, having almost 150.000 residents. \nHistory.\nManama has been a city since at least the 1300s, when it was mentioned in Islamic books. It was owned by Portugal from 1521 to 1602, by Persia from 1602 to 1783, and by the Al-Khalifa family for a long time after that. In 1971, Manama became the capital city of Bahrain.\nAreas of Manama.\nThe city is divided into a few parts: "}
{"id": "21723", "revid": "7892101", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21723", "title": "Protist", "text": "Protists\n are single-celled eukaryotes (which are organisms with a nucleus). The term Protista was first used by Ernst Haeckel in 1866. Admittedly, the Protista is a collection of disparate single-celled forms, but while a more sophisticated taxonomy is in flux (changing), Protista is still a useful term."}
{"id": "21726", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21726", "title": "The Apple Dumpling Gang", "text": "The Apple Dumpling Gang is a Disney movie from 1975, in which three orphan children find gold during California's Gold Rush. Tim Conway and Don Knotts also star in it as two gangsters.\nThe movie is based on the book of the same name by Jack Bickham."}
{"id": "21730", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21730", "title": "0s", "text": "The 0s only had nine years which started in 1 AD and ended in 9 AD.\nSignificant people.\nThose people had significant influence on things in this decade."}
{"id": "21731", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21731", "title": "1001", "text": "1001 (MI) was a common year starting on Wednesday when the Julian calendar was used. In the Gregorian Calendar, it was the first year of the 2nd millennium and the 11th century"}
{"id": "21732", "revid": "1125177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21732", "title": "1009", "text": "1009 (MIX) was a common year when the Julian calendar was used. It was the ninth year of the 2nd millennium and the 11th century."}
{"id": "21733", "revid": "1125177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21733", "title": "1024", "text": "1024 (MXXIV) was a common year when the Julian calendar was used. It was the twenty-fourth year of the 2nd millennium and the 11th century."}
{"id": "21734", "revid": "679012", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21734", "title": "Quentin Tarantino", "text": "Quentin Jerome Tarantino (born May 27, 1963) is an American filmmaker. He was born in Knoxville, Tennessee. Tarantino is an independent movie maker. He wrote, directed, and acted in \"Pulp Fiction\", \"Reservoir Dogs\" and \"Kill Bill\" among others. His movies have become famous for violence and humor. He won Academy Awards for Best Original Screenplay in 1994 for Pulp Fiction and 2012 for Django Unchained."}
{"id": "21735", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21735", "title": "Leander-class frigate", "text": "The Leander-class frigate or Type 12M is a type of ship that was used by the Royal Navy.\nThe class became well known through the Warship BBC television drama series."}
{"id": "21736", "revid": "1133508", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21736", "title": "Spacecraft", "text": "A spacecraft is a vehicle that can carry people and cargo beyond the Earth's atmosphere, through space to other planetary bodies, space stations, or orbits and back home again. Spacecraft which are launched from the surface of a planet are called launch vehicles and usually take-off from launch pads at spaceports. \nMost spacecraft today are propelled by rocket engines, which shoot hot gases opposite to the direction of travel. Other forms of propulsion are used when appropriate. Spacecraft which do not need to escape from strong gravity may use ion thrusters or other more efficient methods. \nBecause of the very large amount of energy needed to leave the Earth's gravity, spacecraft are usually very expensive to build, launch, and operate. Plans for future spacecraft often focus on reducing these costs so more people can participate in space. But today, costs are still very high, and until recently all spacecraft were sponsored by national governments.\nHuman spaceflight vehicles.\nMost expensive of all is to send people in to space, due to their needs for food, water, air, living space, safety, and control. People participating in this way have special names: Americans call themselves astronauts; Russians call themselves cosmonauts; Chinese call themselves taikonauts.\nSatellites.\nSome of the most important spacecraft today are artificial satellites. Artificial satellites are smaller, unmanned spacecraft. Some go into Low Earth orbit to look at the Earth or for other purposes. Others are sent to geostationary orbit to relay radio signals from one part of Earth to another, or to watch events on Earth from a high point of view. Communications satellites are important for television and other communications, and other satellites help with weather prediction and other jobs. "}
{"id": "21739", "revid": "183741", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21739", "title": "Acoustics", "text": "Acoustics is a science. It studies the mechanical waves in gases, liquids, and solids. These waves can make vibration, sound, ultrasound and infrasound.\nA scientist who works in the field of acoustics is an acoustician. Someone who works with acoustics technology may be called an acoustical engineer. "}
{"id": "21740", "revid": "380105", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21740", "title": "Public finance", "text": "Public finance is the study of how the government raises funds and spends its money, and their economic effect."}
{"id": "21741", "revid": "7849548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21741", "title": "Budget", "text": "A budget is an account of the money to be spent on a project, or by a person or organization in a time period. It usually lists the various things that are to be done, and how much to spend on each. It may also list estimated revenues. When spending is less than revenues, it is a surplus budget. When spending is more than revenues, it is a deficit budget. When they are the same, it's a balanced budget.\nAn organization's budget is usually for a fiscal year."}
{"id": "21742", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21742", "title": "Indirect tax", "text": "An indirect tax is a tax that is paid as part of a product. Many countries tax gasoline or cigarettes, but they do so indirectly. Because of the tax, the product will be more expensive. In turn, the shops will then pay the tax for the number of packets of cigarettes they sold, or for the amount of gasoline. This is opposed to a direct tax, which is directly paid by the consumer."}
{"id": "21744", "revid": "7394847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21744", "title": "Hippo", "text": ""}
{"id": "21745", "revid": "7815849", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21745", "title": "Erode", "text": "Erode is a city in Tamil Nadu, India. It is the capital of the Erode district. About 500,000 people live in the city.\nErode District in Tamil Nadu State is very important market centre for Turmeric. Turmeric is received, not only from Erode district, but also from the other parts of Tamil Nadu and adjoining district like Mysore in Karnataka State. \nErode is well known for marketing of textile products of Handloom, Powerloom and Readymade Garments. The Handloom and Powerloom product such as Cotton Saree, Bed Spreads, Carpets, Lungies, Printed Fabrics, Towels, Dhotis are marketed here.\nKangeyam is famous for Bulls and Oil Mills. Kangeyam cows are not noted for their yield but their availability was in large numbers has helped the district to make a mark in the field of dairy development"}
{"id": "21746", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21746", "title": "Herbivorous", "text": ""}
{"id": "21747", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21747", "title": "Carnivorous", "text": ""}
{"id": "21748", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21748", "title": "Omniverous", "text": ""}
{"id": "21749", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21749", "title": "Insectivorous", "text": ""}
{"id": "21751", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21751", "title": "Omnivorous", "text": ""}
{"id": "21752", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21752", "title": "Carniverous", "text": ""}
{"id": "21753", "revid": "7851553", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21753", "title": "Sky Sports", "text": "Sky Sports is a group of ten channels. The channels are owned by a major company named British Sky Broadcasting. It is the most powerful sports television company in the United Kingdom.\nSky Sports is known for its major football coverage and helped launch the FA Premier League in 1992.\nSky Sports has a series of well known shows such as \"Soccer AM\", which is a morning chat show with jokes, it is sponsored by \"Gillette Soccer Saturday\".\nOn 22 August 1999, Sky Sports launched Sky Sports Active. The first game was Arsenal vs Manchester United. It gave the viewer to focus either on one player, or look at different camera angles. It soon proved to be successful, and Sky decided to continue it. It can be accessed by pressing the Red Button on your Sky Digital Remote. On 26 August 2014, Sky Sports Active closed and was replaced by Sky Sports split screen (Only on Sky Q 1TB Box and Sky Q 2TB Box)\nOn 24 November 2002, Sky Sports won the rights to air the UEFA Champions League, with ITV. They had beaten channels such as the BBC and Channel 4 to win it. Part of the deal had stated that ITV would air two games on a Sunday and Sky Sports would air 2 games on a Monday. Sky soon launched an 8-screen 'Champions League Interactive' channel which showed 8 live games.\nIn November 2006, Sky Sports launched their News advertisement. This ad, with the text \"THE UK's FIRST SPORTS NEWS STATION\" ran until January 2007 in the UK and Ireland. Sky Sports News launched on TV at the time."}
{"id": "21758", "revid": "664627", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21758", "title": "Rhetoric", "text": "Rhetoric is the art of convincing and persuading people by language through public speaking or writing. The root of the word is from Greek \u1fe5\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03b9\u03ba\u1f74 [\u03c4\u03ad\u03c7\u03bd\u03b7] roughly meaning 'the art of speech'.\nWebster\u2019s dictionary defines it as \u201cthe art or science of using words effectively in speaking or writing, especially the art or science of literary composition.\u201d\nThe word \u201ceffectively\u201d in this definition is a relative matter. What is effective in one context may be entirely different in another cultural setting. Different languages differ in their rhetorical styles \u2013 that is, in the way that they use language to accomplish various purposes. People can be trained in this skill. It is the art or the technique of persuasion, used by orators (public speakers), writers and media.\nHistory.\nIts origin was in Ancient Greece of the 5th century. They made their decisions by speaking for or against proposals in a public place. Also, speeches were made when a person was accused of a serious crime before the magistrates. Because rhetoric was so important to them, the Greeks and Romans wrote about how to be a good rhetorician. This is sometimes called 'secondary rhetoric'. It is a technique which can be taught, and used in writing. An early example is Plato, who wrote his works in the form of dialogues. Each question raised is discussed between two characters. In the ancient world, the Romans, who were much influenced by the ancient Greeks, also used the same methods for decision-making. Cicero was one of their famous orators. In their case, the debates did not involve all citizens, just the Roman Senate or the courts.\nIn medieval universities rhetoric was taught as part of the curriculum. Rhetoric, dialectic and grammar form the trivium which, with the quadrivium, make up the seven liberal arts of Western culture. During Antiquity and the Middle Ages, rhetoric was used for persuasion in public and political arenas, and also in the courts of justice. The words 'rhetoric' or 'sophism' are often used with a negative meaning, of disinformation or propaganda. As the art of persuasion, the rhetoric continues to be important in present-day public life. They are also used to describe a speech with doubtful or slanted arguments. Several hundred \"rhetorical figures\" were recognised by classical rhetoricians. Some of these are still in use, such as metaphor, simile and paradox.\nIn the modern world, speeches made on television, ideas embedded in advertisements or in front of crowds are all rhetorics. They speak to people directly with the intention of persuading them. Before World War II, radio and print media were powerful tools for rhetoric. The newspapers and books persuade readers towards a particular point of view. Rhetoric does not depend only on a live audience.\nStructure.\nAccording to Aristotle, a rhetoric has three elements in persuasion:\nContrastive rhetoric.\nA 1988 study was conducted by S\u00f6ter in Australia among students who were native speakers of Arabic, Vietnamese and English. The sample, 6th and 11th grade students were asked to write a bedtime story for a young child. Patterns were immediately evident in the different approaches used by the student's in the story writing task.\nThe Vietnamese stories placed primary focus on characters and the relationships between them (manifested in a great proportion of dialog). English stories placed primary focus on the sequential forward movement of the plot. Arabic stories placed primary focus on descriptive elements of the setting.\nContrastive rhetorics says that people who share a common language might have different rhetoric styles due the influence of culture and exchanges. The discourse goes beyond the target language's native forms of discourse organization or rhetoric.\nA paraphrasing task study was done in the USA among Chinese and Russian students. American students were easily able to paraphrase, but Chinese students found it hard, perhaps due to their academic environment influenced by Confucian traditions. Russian students struggled with the paraphrasing because norm in Russian academic environment was that students are only required to read and describe, and was not required to give a personal interpretation or an opinion.\nU.S. rhetorical style: ethnocentric sources describe it as typically direct and relatively logical.\nQuotes.\nSome very witty things have been said against orators and their rhetoric:"}
{"id": "21759", "revid": "1120542", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21759", "title": "Skill", "text": "A skill or technique is a learned ability to do something. \nIt could be playing a musical instrument or playing a kind of sport or even doing something simple like using a corkscrew. Someone who is trying to do something but not succeeding may be using the wrong technique. Skill does not always have to be something physical: it may refer to the way a person approaches a problem.\nExamples of skills are:"}
{"id": "21760", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21760", "title": "Mail carrier", "text": ""}
{"id": "21762", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21762", "title": "Extinct", "text": ""}
{"id": "21763", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21763", "title": "Hamas", "text": "Hamas (, acronym of Harakat al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya, , literally \"Islamic Resistance Movement\") is a Palestinian Sunni Islamist terrorist group. It was started in 1987 during the First Intifada by Ahmed Yassin and Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi as the Gaza branch of the Muslim Brotherhood organization in Egypt. In the 2006 Palestinian election, Hamas got 74 of 132 seats in parliament and controls the Gaza Strip. The group wants to build a Palestinian state based on Sharia law in the area that is now Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza Strip. It also advocates holy war against Jews and Christians, and wants Muslims to unify against them. Hamas does not recognize the State of Israel.\nName.\n\"Hamas\" is an acronym of the Arabic phrase , or Harakat al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya or \"Islamic Resistance Movement\".\nViolence.\nHamas is known for its military wing, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, which plans and carries out attacks on Israel. Because of its policy of suicide bombings and rocket attacks on civilians in Israel, the United States, European Union and other countries call it a terrorist organisation. The country of Jordan has made the group illegal. However, many of the international press, including the English-language edition of the Israeli daily newspaper \"Haaretz\", refer to Hamas members by the more neutral term \"militants.\"\nPopularity.\nIn early 2006, Hamas won a clear victory in the vote for the Palestinian parliament. Voters saw Hamas as an alternative to exchange the long-ruling Fatah party, the main part of the PLO. Fatah had not improved the Palestinian people's conditions and reached statehood, and was thought to be corrupt.\nRunning Gaza.\nHamas has shown its organizational ability by building health, education, and social services to help the population in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, where there is much poverty. Such efforts have increased its support. In the first half of 2007, Hamas gained political control of the Gaza Strip, while Fatah keeps its headquarters in the West Bank. However, Hamas has stolen large amounts of aid money and gotten Gaza in many wars.\nHamas is also associated in some way with Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine headed by Ahmed Jibril."}
{"id": "21765", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21765", "title": "Suicide attack", "text": "A suicide attack is an attack where the attacker (either one person or a group of people) plans on killing people and/or destroying property while also dying in the process. In a suicide attack, the attacker dies as a result of the attack, for example in an explosion or a crash.\nNowadays, suicide attacks are often done with a vehicle or an explosive material such as a bomb (a suicide bombing), or sometimes both (i.e. a car filled with explosives). If everything goes according to plan, the attacker is killed as soon as their attack is complete (when their vehicle crashes or their bomb detonates).\nSuicide attacks are often done in a crowded place so that as many people as possible are killed. They are common in the Middle East and South Asia. Most attacks on Israel, carried out by Hamas or other Palestinian terrorist groups are suicide bombings."}
{"id": "21767", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21767", "title": "Harakat al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya", "text": ""}
{"id": "21768", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21768", "title": "Laser", "text": "A laser is a machine that makes an amplified, single-colour source of light. It uses special gases or crystals to make the light with only a single color. The gases are energized to make them emit light. Then mirrors are used to amplify (make stronger) the light. In many lasers all the light travels in one direction, so it stays as a narrow beam of Collimated light that does not get wider or weaker as most sources of light do.\nWhen pointed at something, this narrow beam makes a single point of light. The energy of the light stays in that one narrow beam instead of spreading out like a flashlight (electric torch).\nThe word \"laser\" is an acronym for \"light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation\". Both the device and its name were developed from the earlier Maser.\nMechanism.\nA laser creates light by special actions involving a material called an \"optical gain medium\". Energy is put into this material using an 'energy pump'. This can be electricity, another light source, or some other source of energy. The energy makes the material go into what is called an excited state. This means the electrons in the material have extra energy, and after a bit of time they will lose that energy. When they lose the energy they will release a photon (a particle of light). The type of optical gain medium used will change what color (wavelength) will be produced. Releasing photons is the \"stimulated emission of radiation\" part of laser.\nMany things can radiate light, like a light bulb, but the light will not be organized in one direction and phase. By using an electric field to control how the light is created, this light will now be one kind, going in one direction. This is \"coherent radiation\".\nAt this point, the light is still weak. The mirrors on either side bounce the light back and forth, and this hits other parts of the optical gain medium, causing those parts to also release photons, generating more light (\"light amplification\"). When all of the optical gain medium is producing light, this is called saturation and creates a very strong beam of light at a very narrow wavelength, which we would call a laser beam.\nDesign.\nThe light moves through the medium between the two mirrors that reflect the light back and forth between them. One of the mirrors, however, only partially reflects the light, allowing some to escape. The escaping light makes up the laser beam.\nThis is a simple design; the type of optical gain medium used usually defines the type of laser. It can be a crystal, examples are ruby and a garnet crystal made of yttrium and aluminum with the rare earth metal mixed in. Gases can be used for laser by using helium, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, neon or others. Large, powerful lasers are usually gas lasers. A free-electron laser uses a beam of electrons and can be tuned to emit different colors. Finally, the smallest lasers use semiconductor diodes to produce the light. These are the most numerous kind, used in electronics.\nHistory.\nAlbert Einstein was the first to have the idea of stimulated emission that could produce a laser. From that point many years were spent to see if the idea worked. At first, people succeeded in making masers and later figured how to make shorter visible wavelengths. It was not until 1959 that the name laser was coined by Gordon Gould in a research paper. The first working laser was put together and operated by Theodore Maiman at the Hughes Research Laboratories in 1960. Many people started working on lasers at this time, and the question of who would get the patent for the laser wasn't decided until 1987 (Gould won the rights).\nApplications.\nLasers have found many uses in everyday life as well as in industry. Lasers are found in CD and DVD players, where they read the code from the disk that stores a song or movie. A laser is often used to read the bar codes or SQR codes on things sold in a store, to identify a product and give its price. Lasers are used in medicine, particularly in LASIK eye surgery, where the laser is used to repair the shape of the cornea. It is used in chemistry with spectroscopy to identify materials, to find out what kind of gases, solids or liquids something is made of. Stronger lasers can be used to cut metal.\nLasers are used to measure the distance of the Moon from Earth by reflecting off reflectors left by the Apollo missions. By measuring the time it takes for the light to travel to the Moon and back again we can find out exactly how far away the moon is.\nLaser pointers are used by people to point at a place on a map or diagram. For example, lecturers use them. Also, many people like to play with laser pointers. Some people have pointed them at aircraft. This is dangerous, and it is also illegal in many countries. People have been arrested and prosecuted for this crime.\nComputers commonly use an optical computer mouse as an input device. Modern laser pointers are too big and powerful for this use, so most mice use small VCSEL's, or \"Vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers\" for this purpose. These lasers are also used in DVD, CD-ROM drives and holography."}
{"id": "21771", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21771", "title": "NBC", "text": "NBC, whose letters stand for National Broadcasting Company, is an American television network that started in 1926 as a radio company. NBC started airing Its first television programs in 1944. NBC is owned by Comcast, and was previously owned by General Electric and Universal Studios. NBC owns the cable news channels CNBC and MSNBC.\nIt is nicknamed \"The Peacock Network\" because of the animal in its logo.\nThe network is famous for its three-note chimes, and NBC Sunday Night Football, which is the most watched TV series after American Idol. Some famous NBC shows are Saturday Night Live, The Fresh Prince of Bel Air, Law and Order, 30 Rock, Frasier, ER, Cheers, Will and Grace, Meet the Press, and Today.\nNBC Television Shows.\nThis is Us\nGood Morning Miss Bliss\nCity Guys\nStations.\nWTHR Indianapolis, Indiana\nWNBC New York City, New York\nKNBC Los Angeles, California"}
{"id": "21772", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21772", "title": "Thiruvananthapuram", "text": "Thiruvananthapuram () is the capital city of the Indian state of Kerala. The city used to be known by the name of Trivandrum. It is on the west coast of India near the far south of the mainland.\nWith 889,191 people as of 2001, it is the biggest city in Kerala in terms of size and number of people.\nThe city is the state capital and houses many national and state government offices, organizations and companies. It is also a major center of learning and is home to several schools and colleges including Kerala University, and to many scientific institutions, the most prominent being the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology (SCTIMST), Technopark, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB) and Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST).\nOrigin of name.\nThiruvananthapuram literally means \"City of Lord Anantha\" in Malayalam. The name derives from the god of the Hindu temple at the centre of the city. Anantha is the serpent Shesha on whom Padmanabhan or Vishnu lies. The temple of Vishnu lying on Ananta, the Sri Padmanabhaswamy Temple is the most recognizable landmark of the city. The city was officially known as \"Trivandrum\" in English until 1991, when the government decided to change the city's name back to the original name, Thiruvananthapuram, in all languages. However, the city is still widely referred to as \"Trivandrum\" (now Thiruvananthapuram).\nInfrastructure.\nThe city is fully electrified by the Kerala State Electricity Board (KSEB). The district is divided in to three circles: Transmission circle, Thiruvananthapuram city and Kattakkada. Domestic users account for 43% of the total power usage, or 90 million units per month. Thiruvananthapuram district has one 220\u00a0kV, nine 110\u00a0kV and six 66\u00a0kV electrical substations. A 400\u00a0kV substation has just been commissioned by the Power Grid Corporation and will ensure high-quality power supply to the city.\nThe water supply schemes cover 100% within the city limits. It is 84% of the urban and 69% of the rural population, when the district is considered. Peppara and Aruvikkara dams are the main sources of water for distribution in the capital city. The new project plan for improving the water supply with Japan aid covers Thiruvananthapuram city and six suburban panchayats having urban characteristics.\nThe sewerage system in the city was implemented at the time of the Travancore Kingdom, and modernised in 1938. This scheme for the disposal of sullage and sewage is an underground system. The whole system is controlled by Kerala Water Authority now. The city area is divided in to seven blocks for the execution of the sewerage system, two commissioned in the 1990s and two after 2000. The sewerage is pumped to a stilling chamber at the Sewerage Treatment Plant (STP) at Valiyathura, and is disposed through sewage farming. Diary Development Department maintains this sewage farm and fodder cultivation is done here. There is no revenue generation from this scheme, and the sewerage system in the city is a service provided to the residents.\nStrategic Importance.\nApart from being the capital of India\u2019s most literate and socially developed state, Thiruvananthapuram is a strategically important city in Southern India. Being the largest city in India\u2019s deep south, it is important for both military logistics and civil aviation in the southern part of the country. It is the headquarters of the \"Southern Air Command(SAC)\" of the Indian Air Force. The city is very close to the international shipping route and east\u2013west shipping axis. Also, it falls under the international air route.\nDue to the strategic importance of the city, the Indian Air Force authorities have planned to make an aerospace command in SAC.\nThe plan for setting up a new \"Tri-Service Command\", which will integrate all the three forces under a single command, is also in the pipeline.\nBeing the Indian city with the closest air link to the small island-country of Maldives and also Sri Lanka, the city\u2019s medical and health infrastructure caters to patients from both countries, especially Maldives. Exports of perishables and medicines from Trivandrum International Airport run to full capacity on everyday flights to Maldives and Sri Lanka because of this nearness. Thiruvananthapuram also provides a key link in movement of goods and passengers to and from southern Tamil Nadu into Kerala, the state border being just 30\u00a0km away. The city is also important for people from around the world seeking help through Ayurveda medicine and therapy. Ayurveda resorts are coming up at a rapid pace along the International Beach of Kovalam and Varkala coast."}
{"id": "21773", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21773", "title": "Trivandrum", "text": ""}
{"id": "21775", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21775", "title": "Pigeon", "text": ""}
{"id": "21776", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21776", "title": "Animal Farm", "text": "Animal Farm is a short novel by George Orwell. It was written during World War II and published in 1945. It is about a group of farm animals who rebel against their farmer. They hope to create a place where the animals can be equal, free, and happy. In the end, however, they are betrayed and the farm ends up as bad it was before.\nThe story is an allegory, meaning that the author wanted it to represent real life events. It is one of the most famous allegories about political events. It is based on Joseph Stalin's betrayal of the Russian Revolution.\nAlthough rejected by several publishers, when published it became a best-seller. \"Animal Farm\" is one of Orwell's two best-known books (the other is \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\") and is widely viewed as a classic. \"Time\" magazine chose the book as one of the 100 best English-language novels (1923 to 2005). it also featured at number 31 on the Modern Library List of Best 20th-Century Novels. It won a Retrospective Hugo Award in 1996, and is included in the Great Books of the Western World selection.\nSummary.\nManor Farm is run by Mr Jones, a cruel and drunken farmer. One day, the animals gather at a meeting to listen to Old Major, a wise old pig. Old Major makes a speech, calling for animals to rise up against their farmers. The animals are very keen about the idea. Old Major dies a few days later. The pigs, who are the most intelligent animals, begin planning a rebellion. They are led by Snowball and Napoleon.\nAbout three months later, the animals revolt against Mr Jones and take over the farm. They change its name to \"Animal Farm\". They decide the farm will now be ruled only by animals, calling the system \"animalism\". They write seven commandments, with the most important being \"All animals are equal\". \u201cFour legs good, two legs bad\u201d becomes a popular chant for the sheep. Mr Jones and his friends attack the farm to try to take it back, but in the \"Battle of the Cowshed\" the animals drive them away. Mr Jones flees and never returns.\nSnowball and Napoleon fall out with each other, as they have different ideas for how Animal Farm should be led. Snowball announces plans to build a windmill, but Napoleon disagrees. Napoleon trains nine puppies, who grow into vicious dogs who will serve him. When the dogs are fully grown, he uses them to chase Snowball off the farm. He takes control and rules the farm by himself (as a dictator). Napoleon uses the dogs to kill any animal that does not agree with him, while a pig called Squealer keeps telling the animals that everything is fine and they should support Napoleon.\nNapoleon changes his mind and decides to build a windmill, pretending that it was his idea all along. The first windmill they build collapses. Napoleon blames this (and other problems) on Snowball. He claims that Snowball is sneaking around Animal Farm ruining everything. Many animals are killed for \"being in contact with Snowball\". Napoleon starts working with human beings outside, even though this used to be forbidden. One of them is their neighbour, a farmer called Mr Frederick. He brings in a group of men who invade the farm and destroy the second windmill. The animals fight them off in the \"Battle of the Windmill\", at great cost.\nAs the animals build a third windmill, Boxer, their strongest horse, loses his strength because of old age and collapses. Napoleon sends him to be slaughtered, even though Boxer was loyal to him. The pigs continue to work with humans and start to behave like them, such as living in the farmhouse and walking on two legs. They teach the sheep a new chant: \u201cFour legs good, two legs better\u201d. The commandments are replaced by the words \"All animals are equal, but some animals are more equal than others.\" In the end, other animals watch the pigs talking with a group of humans and decide they cannot tell which is which.\nBackground.\nGeorge Orwell who was a socialist and was opposed to dictatorship (rule by one person). In particular, he did not like the communist government of Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union. In 1936 and 1937, Orwell fought in the Spanish Civil War. He had watched as democratic left-wing rebels were pushed out by pro-Soviet communist rebels. In the introduction to the 1947 Ukrainian translation of \"Animal Farm\", Orwell said he wrote it because he wished to destroy what he called the \"Soviet myth\".\nOrwell said he got the idea from seeing a young boy whipping a large cart horse. He explained, \"It struck me that if only such animals became aware of (knew) their strength we should have no power over them, and that men exploit (badly use) animals in much the same way as the rich exploit the proletariat (the poor, the lower class)\".\nCharacters in the book.\nThere are many characters in the book who are based on real people. They are grouped into pigs, horses, humans and other animals.\nIt also features Bobbin the 3 legged spider who appears before the revolution occurs.\nAnimalism.\nAnimal-ism is a system of beliefs shared by the farm animals of Manor Farm. The purpose is to ensure the farm animals behave like actual animals and not follow the footsteps of humans beings. Therefore, any human behavior is considered contrary to the spirit of Animalism.\nBeasts of England.\n\"Beasts of England\" is a song that is featured in the story. The tune as said to be \"a cross between La Cucaracha and Oh, My Darling Clementine\". Old Major teaches the song to the animals in an early scene, and it becomes very popular. It becomes the first national anthem of Animal Farm. Later on, Napoleon orders a new anthem to be written, with words that praise him.\nCommandments.\nThese are the original commandments laid down by the pigs.\nFor the sheep, who are said to be stupid, they are instead taught the chant \"Four legs good, two legs bad.\" Napoleon sometimes gets the sheep to chant this when he wants the animals to stop talking.\nAs the story goes on, the pigs start changing the commandments. For example, \"No animal shall drink alcohol\" becomes \"No animal shall drink alcohol \"to excess\"\". By the end of the story, all the commandments have been erased apart from \"All animals are equal\", which has been changed to \"All Animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others.\" Meanwhile, the sheep chant has been changed to \"Four legs good, two legs \"better\".\""}
{"id": "21778", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21778", "title": "Euclid of Alexandria", "text": ""}
{"id": "21782", "revid": "43555", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21782", "title": "Stalin", "text": ""}
{"id": "21783", "revid": "11594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21783", "title": "Josef Stalin", "text": ""}
{"id": "21786", "revid": "1325", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21786", "title": "Miso", "text": "Miso (\u5473\u564c or \u307f\u305d) is a thick or solid paste. It is a traditional Japanese seasoning.\nMiso is similar to the Korean \"doenjang\". It is made by fermenting soy beans with sea salt or salt and \"k\u014dji\". K\u014dji is the product of fermenting rice, barley, or soybeans with a mold culture, \"K\u014dji-kin\" (Aspergillus oryzae). Often, grains such as barley or rice, and sometimes other ingredients, are added. Miso is high in protein and rich in vitamins and minerals. Miso tastes salty and, depending on the grains used and fermentation time, may also be sweet. Miso is used to make miso soup.\nMiso is a very important part of Japanese food. There are different kinds of miso. \"Kome miso\" (\u7c73\u5473\u564c) is made from rice and beans. \"Mame miso\" (\u8c46\u5473\u564c) is made from beans. \"Mugi miso\" (\u9ea6\u5473\u564c) is made from barley and beans. Awase miso (\u5408\u305b\u5473\u564c) is a mix of these misos.\nHistory.\nMiso first came to Japan from China or the Korean peninsula. Ancient Chinese \"jan\" (\u91a4) is the origin of miso. \"Jan\" is an ancient fermented seasoning. According to classical scholars, \"jan\" was called \"hishio\" or \"kuki\" in the Edo era. In China, \"jan\" was written about in the \"Shurai\".\nMiso existed in the Jomon era in Japan. \"Jan\" is the Japanese original seasoning. In the Nara era, \"jan\" was found in Nishi city, Heiankyo. Miso was used for seasoning porridge made of rice and vegetables. In the Sengoku period, Miso was important to preserved food. \nMany Japanese used to make miso in their own homes. This was called \"Temae-miso\". In the Muromachi era, it was used as a food preservative and as a seasoning. Miso was an important source of nutrients for soldiers. In the Edo era, industrial mass production method of miso began. \"Temae-miso\" became less common. \"Temae-miso\" nowadays also used when a person is proud of something.\nThere are many different flavors of miso. It depends on regions. \"Shiromiso\" (\u767d\u5473\u564c) is popular in the western Kansai region, especially in Kyoto. A\"kamiso\" is popular in the eastern Kant\u014d region or northern region. Shinshumiso (\u4fe1\u5dde\u5473\u564c) is generally popular after the second world war, because it is mass produced in factories and sold in supermarkets in over Japan."}
{"id": "21787", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21787", "title": "Miso soup", "text": " in Japanese) is a traditional Japanese soup. It is made from a kind of broth or stock, called \"dashi\" into which miso paste is dissolved. Various solid ingredients like wakame, seaweed, tofu from soybeans, and sometimes mushrooms, potatos, and eggplants are added to make the finished soup. The soup is usually served in bowls, sometimes in lacquer bowls. They can be drunk directly from the bowl without using a spoon. Solid ingredients are eaten with chopsticks (\u7bb8). Different types of miso produce distinctive soups. There are three main types of miso: dark-brown, white, and a combination of the two. "}
{"id": "21789", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21789", "title": "Wakame", "text": "Wakame (Japanese: \u308f\u304b\u3081 or \u82e5\u5e03) is a type of kelp. People eat it. Its scientific name is \"Undaria pinnatifida\".\nIt is sold either dried or salted. It is often used in miso soup and salads. In Korea it is called miyeok. It is used in salads, or as the main ingredient in miyeok soup. In China it is called qundaicai. Chinese production is concentrated around Dalian.\nIn New Zealand \"Undaria pinnatifida\" is a very serious weed, and is one of the 100 worst invasive species in the world. It was first seen in Wellington Harbour in 1987. It probably arrived accidentally in the late 1980s, on ships from Asia, in ballast water. It is native to cold temperate coastal areas of Japan, Korea and China, but recently it has also spread to France, Britain, Spain, Italy, Argentina and Australia.\n\"Undaria\" is now found around much of south-eastern New Zealand, and as far north as Auckland. It spreads in two ways. Naturally, through the millions of microscopic spores released by each fertile plant; and attached to vessel hulls and marine farming equipment.\n\"Undaria\" is a highly successful and fertile species, which makes it a serious invader."}
{"id": "21790", "revid": "907", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21790", "title": "Edible", "text": ""}
{"id": "21791", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21791", "title": "Kelp", "text": "Kelp is a type of marine seaweed. It is a brown algae. There are many different kinds of kelp. Kelp grow in large forests, usually near the surface of the water. It grows in nutrient rich saltwater. Some kelps grow very fast (up to 30\u00a0cm a day). Kelp can reach a length of up to 60 metres. The blades are kept afloat by gas-filled bladders.\nKelp plays an important role as food and habitat for fish and other forms. It may be eaten as a vegetable.\nKelp is found in many places. People put it in aquariums. In the Monterey Aquarium there is a large forest of kelp.\nIn some parts of the Pacific Ocean, sea urchins have eaten so much kelp that the kelp forests become urchin barrens. "}
{"id": "21794", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21794", "title": "Tofu", "text": "Tofu (\u8c46\u8150), sometimes also called doufu (usually used in Chinese recipes) or bean curd (literal translation), is a food made from soybeans. In fact, it is a very complex process. Tofu is made by coagulating soy milk, and then pressing the resulting curds into blocks. The making of tofu from soy milk is similar to the technique of making cheese from milk. Wheat gluten, or seitan, in its steamed and fried forms, is often mistakenly called \"tofu\" in Asian or vegetarian dishes.\nChina.\nChina has more kinds of tofu than Japan and various tofu foods.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, tofu is a common food, used often in miso soup or as a hot dish. People in Japan has created various kinds of tofu. One of them is \u7d79\u3053\u3057\u8c46\u8150 (or soft tofu), \u6728\u7dbf\u8c46\u8150 (or firm tofu, or solid tofu) and \"\u51cd\u307f\u8c46\u8150\" (or dried tofu). It is said that the way to make tofu from soybeans was taught by the Chinese a several hundreds years ago. you can find its very first history in a diary of \u5948\u826f\u6625\u65e5\u5927\u793e in 1183 of the Heian period.\nAmerica.\nIn the United States, tofu is becoming more popular. Today, Americans buy tofu at the grocery store. The word \u201ctofu\u201d takes root in common use.\nOthers.\nIn South Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar and Indonesia, tofu is daily food.\nNutrition.\nTofu is rich in textured vegetable protein and is relatively low in calories. Dietary fiber is a little for process. More and more Americans and Europeans use it as health food."}
{"id": "21795", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21795", "title": "Soy milk", "text": "Soy milk (also called soymilk, soya milk, soybean milk, soy bean milk, soy drink, or soy beverage) is a milk-like product made from soybeans.\nSoy milk originated in China where the soybean was native. Later on, the soybean and soybean foods came to Japan."}
{"id": "21796", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21796", "title": "Doufu", "text": ""}
{"id": "21797", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21797", "title": "Bean curd", "text": ""}
{"id": "21799", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21799", "title": "Soy", "text": ""}
{"id": "21800", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21800", "title": "Dashi", "text": "Dashi (\u51fa\u6c41\u3001\u3060\u3057) is a kind of stock or broth mainly used for soup or dishes in Japanese cooking. The most common form of dashi is a simple broth or stock made by kombu (edible kelp) or katsuobushi (flakes of dried skipjack tuna) in boiling water. niboshi (\u716e\u5e72\u3057) is also used, too. It is not always necessary to strain the resulting liquid. Dashi can be a basis for miso soup, Japanese noodle (\u3046\u3069\u3093 or \u305d\u3070) soup, and many other Japanese simmering (or boiling) liquids. Fresh dashi made from kelp and katsuobushi is not so popular today in Japan. Some people use instant substitutes to add boiled water.\nOther kinds of dashi stock are made by soaking (or putting) kelp, shiitake, or niboshi in cool water for many hours. Or they are made by heating them in water nearly to boiling and then straining the resulting broth. Kelp stock or \"konbu dashi\" is made by soaking kelp, or \"sea tangle\", in water. \"Shiitake dashi\" stock is made by soaking dried shiitake mushrooms in water. \"Niboshi dashi\" stock is made by soaking dried small sardines. Some use niboshi after taking off (or pinching off) their heads and entrails in water, but others use whole niboshi as this way get tasty dashi, too.\nOther important Japanese flavors include shoyu, mirin, rice vinegar, miso, and sake."}
{"id": "21801", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21801", "title": "Soymilk", "text": ""}
{"id": "21802", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21802", "title": "Soya milk", "text": ""}
{"id": "21803", "revid": "7482783", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21803", "title": "Shiitake mushroom", "text": "The shiitake mushroom, or simply called \"shiitake\"(\u690e\u8338) (\"Lentinus edodes\" or \"Lentinula edodes\") is also known as Chinese black mushroom or black forest mushroom. It is also called \"black mushroom\". It is an edible mushroom, which is typically grown on the tree, such as shii, kunugi and oak.\nThere are two variant names. For high grades of shiitake is \"d\u014dngg\u016b\" (\u51ac\u8339: \u3069\u3093\u3053) (\"winter mushroom\"). And another is \"hu\u0101g\u016b\" (\"flower mushroom,\" (\u9999\u4fe1: \u3053\u3046\u3057\u3093) which has a flower-like cracking pattern on the mushroom's upper surface). Both are produced at colder temperatures. There are many cultivated varieties, which grow-up in a temperature at 7C - 26C, most cultivars like cooler tempertatures."}
{"id": "21804", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21804", "title": "Soybean milk", "text": ""}
{"id": "21805", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21805", "title": "Soy bean milk", "text": ""}
{"id": "21806", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21806", "title": "Soy drink", "text": ""}
{"id": "21807", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21807", "title": "Black forest mushroom", "text": ""}
{"id": "21808", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21808", "title": "Soy beverage", "text": ""}
{"id": "21809", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21809", "title": "Chinese black mushroom", "text": ""}
{"id": "21811", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21811", "title": "Soy sauce", "text": "Soy sauce (US) or soya sauce is a fermented sauce made from soy beans (soya beans), roasted grain, water and salt. It is commonly used in Chinese, Japanese and Korean cuisine. It appears in some Western cuisine dishes, especially as an ingredient in Worcestershire sauce. Real soy sauces are fermented with k\u014dji (\u9eb9, the mold Aspergillus oryzae or \"A. sojae\") and other related microorganisms. \nAlmost all soy sauce has some alcohol added during bottling. This acts as a preservative to protect it from going bad. For this reason, soy sauce should always be kept in the fridge. It should also not be put in direct light. An opened bottle of soy sauce that has been left unrefrigerated could become slightly bitter.\nAlthough there are many types of soy sauce, all are salty and earthy-tasting brownish liquids used to season food while cooking or at the table. What some westerners can only describe as a flavorful, kind of sweet taste is a distinct basic taste called \"umami\" by the Japanese and \"xian-wei\" (\u9c9c\u5473, \"lit.\" fresh taste) by the Chinese.\nAlthough this seasoning was first used in China, it is used several cuisines across Asia and is a particularly important flavoring in Japanese cuisine. There are many types of sauce."}
{"id": "21812", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21812", "title": "Fridge", "text": ""}
{"id": "21813", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21813", "title": "Soya sauce", "text": ""}
{"id": "21814", "revid": "907", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21814", "title": "Eatable", "text": ""}
{"id": "21815", "revid": "7709225", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21815", "title": "Bowl", "text": "A bowl is a container for food. It can hold liquids, such as soups and solids, like popcorn. People also prepare salads in it. A bowl is like a ball cut in half. Bowls are usually made from glass, ceramic, wood or plastic. There is a lot of history regarding bowls, but they are known to first be found in China, 20,000 years ago."}
{"id": "21816", "revid": "109566", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21816", "title": "Oktoberfest", "text": "The Oktoberfest (also called Wiesn) is a German festival that takes place on the Theresienwiese, a public place in the center of Munich, Bavaria. It is every year, in late September and early October. It is a big social event. There is lots of eating and drinking. It is on for sixteen days ending on the first Sunday in October. If this is the first or the second the festival is extended to the end on 3 October, the Day of German Unity. This is the day when East Germany and West Germany joined into one country again in 1990.\nHistory.\nThe first Oktoberfest was on 12 October 1810. The feast was for the wedding of King Ludwig I of Bavaria and Therese of Sachsen-Hildburghausen. The feast lasted for \"5 days\". There was music, eating and drinking. At the end of it there was a big horse-race. The next years they had this horse-race and the feast again, because the people had liked it so much.\nOn 26 September 1980, a right-wing lone wolf terrorist killed 12 people and himself using a bomb.\nToday.\nToday the Oktoberfest is the world's largest fair, and it has become very famous and popular. About six million people visit it every year. Many people and tourists from all over the world come to Munich for Oktoberfest. Other cities have copied the Oktoberfest, and now they also hold feasts that are similar to the Oktoberfest.\nOne of the famous attractions is a big dipper called the \"Wilde Maus\" which means \"Wild mouse\" in English.\nThe tents.\nThere are 14 main tents at the Oktoberfest."}
{"id": "21817", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21817", "title": "28 January", "text": ""}
{"id": "21818", "revid": "7266557", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21818", "title": "Tomb Raider", "text": "Tomb Raider is a computer and video game series. Originally the games were made by Core Design. Now they are being made by Crystal Dynamics. The first game was sold in 1996 for PC, PlayStation and Sega Saturn.\nThe main character of the game is a woman called \"Lara Croft\". She is an archeologist and explores ancient places, searching old relics, often fighting a great danger to the world.\nSince 2001, Paramount Pictures has made two movies like the game, starring Angelina Jolie. And 2018 movies, Angelina Jolie has been switch into Alicia Vikander.\nGames in the series.\nThe first six games in the series was made by Core Design. In 2003, parent company Eidos moved development of the \"Tomb Raider\" games from Core Design to Crystal Dynamics, another Eidos-owned studio, after the sixth game, \"Tomb Raider: The Angel of Darkness\", was met with dislike from critics."}
{"id": "21820", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21820", "title": "Hot dog", "text": " A hot dog (or hotdog) is is an American fast food. It was first created in Germany. In the United States, hot dogs are very popular in areas with large numbers of European immigrants, such as Chicago, Brooklyn and Detroit. The word \"hot dog\" refers to the belief that many people thought hot dogs had actual dog meat. In a few places, hot dogs are also called red-hots. \nA hot dog is made of the remains of the pig after other parts are cut off and sold as bacon, sausage patties, and ham. However many people across the world eat hot dogs and enjoy them very much. Hot dogs can be boiled, grilled, or fried. The word frankfurter comes from Frankfurt, Germany. This sausage is usually served in a bun or another type of bread. The most common type of hot dogs are made from beef, sometimes mixed with pork. Chicken and vegetarian hot dogs are popular as well. Hot dogs and other sausage products were first developed as a way to sell these parts that people would not normally eat. Nearly 20% of the weight of a hot dog is usually non-meat ingredients including water, sugar, and spices. Some legal categories of hot dogs, such as \"frankfurters\" can contain up to 3.5% of non-meat fillers as well, such as corn meal.\nTo add to the taste, various toppings and sauces are often added. The most common sauces in the United States are ketchup, mustard and pickle relish. Onions, chopped pickles, peppers, hot sauce and cheese are also sometimes added to the food. Onions cooked in tomato sauce and Sauerkraut are popular toppings, as is chili.\nIn the United States, there are many different types of hot dogs, with different combinations of chili, cheese, onions, mustard, and other products. One of the most popular types of hot dogs is a chili dog. There are many different types of chili dogs. One of the most well-known is a Coney Island dog, a dog topped with a blend of chili, cheese, mustard and onions that is originally from Michigan.\n Other types of chili dogs include Michigan dogs, which are from upstate New York, and Texas dogs, which are from Pennsylvania. Both Michigan and Texas dogs are spicy; the Texas dog has spicy sauce and the Michigan dog has a spicy weiner. Chili dogs are also popular in the Southwestern United States. Another type of hot dog is a Chicago dog, which is a Vienna beef weiner topped with mustard, onion, neon green pickle relish, peppers, tomatoes and a pickle.\nA type of hot dog called a \"kosher hot dog\" is very common in parts of the United States and overseas. It is similar to most hot dogs except that it is always made of Kosher beef, has more spice added to it. Kosher hotdogs contain less of the less desirable sounding ingredients (such as rectum) as these parts are not considered to be Kosher beef. Halal hot dogs are also made.\nThough hot dogs are most popular in the United States, they are served in many places around the world. People in Japan eat a lot of hot dogs, and the world's largest hot dog ever was made there. In some countries, \"hot dog\" is the name of a completely different sausage dish; for example, in New Zealand it is used to mean corn dog, and hot dogs are called \"American hot dogs\" instead."}
{"id": "21821", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21821", "title": "Hotdog", "text": ""}
{"id": "21822", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21822", "title": "Warlock", "text": ""}
{"id": "21825", "revid": "1122390", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21825", "title": "Constipation", "text": "Constipation is when it is very hard to pass stool (defecate): that is, get rid of digested food waste (feces). Constipation can be caused by many things. One is eating or drinking too much dairy products that use cow milk. To solve this problem many people use a laxative or eat defecation-inducing foods such as plums. Another possible cause could be an obstruction somewhere along the digestive tract (the path that food travels inside the body). A person suffers from constipation if he or she passes stool three times in a week or more seldom. People suffering from constipation may defecate only once or twice in a week, and their stool is very solid and tough. Normally people defecate daily.\nWhen a person is constipated their lower stomach and intestinal area will be blocked. People can usually conquer constipation by eating natural laxatives such a fruits, fruit juice and dietary supplements. Liquid will help get rid of constipation. Constipation can occur by eating hard food such as cheese or meat.\nA good way on preventing constipation is to eat foods which contain fiber such as whole grain\nPapaya and guava is very rich in fiber and potassium should be consume after meal everydayGet rid of constipation.\nThe seven types of stool are:\nTypes 1 and 2 indicate constipation, with 3 and 4 being the \"ideal stools\", especially the latter, as they are the easiest to defecate, and 5\u20137 tending towards diarrhoea."}
{"id": "21869", "revid": "1024653", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21869", "title": "Kernel (computer science)", "text": "A kernel is the central part of an operating system. It manages the operations of the computer and the hardware, most notably memory and CPU time. Kernels also provide services which programs can use through system calls. \nThere are five types of kernels:\nA typical computer user never interacts directly with the kernel. It runs behind the scenes and cannot be seen, except for the text logs that it prints.\nOperations of kernel.\nThe kernel is the most fundamental part of an operating system. It can be thought of as the program which controls all other programs on the computer. When the computer starts, it goes through some initialization (booting) functions, such as checking memory. It is responsible for assigning and unassigning memory space which allows software to run.\nThe kernel provides services so programs can request the use of the network card, the disk or other pieces of hardware. The kernel forwards the request to special programs called device drivers which control the hardware. It also manages the file system and sets interrupts for the CPU to enable multitasking. Many kernels are also responsible for ensuring that faulty programs do not interfere with the operation of others by denying access to memory that has not been allocated to them and restricting the amount of CPU time they can consume.\nIt is the heart of the operating system.\nMicro kernels and monolithic kernels.\nOperating systems commonly use monolithic kernels. In Linux, for example, device drivers are often part of a kernel (specifically Loadable Kernel Modules). When a device is needed, its extension is loaded and 'joined' onto the kernel making the kernel larger. Monolithic kernels can cause trouble when one of these drivers is faulty, such as if a beta driver is downloaded. Because it is part of the kernel the faulty driver can override the mechanisms that deal with faulty programs (see above). This can mean that the kernel, and thus the entire computer, can cease to function. If there are too many devices, the kernel can also run out of memory causing a system crash or making the computer very slow.\nMicrokernels are a way of solving this problem. In a microkernel operating system, the kernel deals only with critical activities, such as controlling the memory and CPU, and nothing else. Drivers and other functions that monolithic kernels would normally include within the kernel are moved outside the kernel, where they are under control. Instead of being an uncontrollable part of the kernel the beta driver is, therefore, no more likely to cause a crash than a beta web browser. That is, if a driver goes wrong it can simply be restarted by the kernel. Unfortunately, creating microkernel based operating systems is very difficult and there are no common microkernel operating systems. Minix and QNX are both microkernel operating systems."}
{"id": "21870", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21870", "title": "Ulm", "text": "Ulm is a city in Germany, in the state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. It was started in about 850 AD.\nIt is on the left side of the river Danube. Across the river on the right side is Neu-Ulm in Bavaria. Together they have more than 170,000 inhabitants. Ulm alone has about 120,000 inhabitants.\nThe university of Ulm was started in 1967. It has about 7000 students.\nThe world's highest church tower is the Ulmer M\u00fcnster (161,5m) in Ulm. Also, Ulm has the oldest city theatre in Germany. Albert Einstein was born in Ulm."}
{"id": "21873", "revid": "7844386", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21873", "title": "Landlocked country", "text": "A country is landlocked if it has no access to any oceans or seas.\nAs an example, Austria is landlocked. France is not landlocked because it has access to the Mediterranean and the Atlantic Ocean. A sea is also landlocked if does not have access to an ocean. This is also called an endorheic basin. As an example, the Caspian Sea is landlocked. The Gulf of Mexico is not landlocked because it has access to the Atlantic Ocean.\nExamples of landlocked countries:\nExamples of landlocked water:\nIf a country is landlocked by landlocked countries (surrounded by landlocked countries), then it is doubly landlocked. Liechtenstein, Uzbekistan and unrecognized state Artsakh are the only three doubly landlocked countries in the world."}
{"id": "21874", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21874", "title": "Kyrgyzstan", "text": "Kyrgyzstan, officially the Kyrgyz Republic, is a country in Central Asia. The country is landlocked (has no coast) and mountainous. It has borders with China, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. Its capital is Bishkek. It was a socialist republic of the Soviet Union, but became independent in 1991. The country was peaceful in the 1990s. Its president, Askar Akayev showed an autocratic and authoritarian character. \nIn 2005, there was an unexpected revolution after the elections of parliament (the legislature) in March. President Akayev resigned on April 4 of that year. Opposition leaders formed a coalition (a group from more than one party), and a new government was formed, led by President Kurmanbek Bakiyev and Prime Minister Feliks Kulov.\nAt the moment, different political groups are fighting for power in the republic. Three of the 75 elected members of Parliament have been murdered. Kyrgyzstan\u2019s main religion is Islam.\nGeography.\nKyrgyzstan is a landlocked country in Central Asia. It is farther from the ocean than any other country in the world. It borders Kazakhstan, China, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. Mountains cover over 80% of the country.\nThe land area of Kyrgyzstan is just a little bigger than the state of Nebraska. \nIssyk-Kul Lake is the largest lake in Kyrgyzstan. It is the largest mountain lake in Asia and the second largest mountain lake in the world after Titicaca. Peak Jengish Chokusu, at 7,439 m (24,406 ft), is the highest point. The highest peaks are in the Kakshaal-Too range.\nBishkek, the capital city, is in the north. It is largest city in Kyrgyzstan. The second largest is the ancient town of Osh.\nEconomy.\nKyrgyzstan was the second poorest country in the former Soviet Union next to Tajikistan. Now it is the second poorest country in Central Asia.\nAgriculture is an important part of the economy in Kyrgyzstan. Much farming is still being done by hand and by horse. Main crops include wheat, sugar beets, potatoes, cotton, tobacco, vegetables, and fruit.\nKyrgyzstan is rich in mineral resources. It has small petroleum and natural gas reserves. Among its mineral reserves are solid amount of coal, gold, uranium, antimony and other metals but not iron. Metallurgy is an important industry.\nImports include petroleum and natural gas, ferrous metals, chemicals, most machinery, wood and paper products, food and construction materials. Its trade partners are Germany, Russia, China, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan."}
{"id": "21875", "revid": "21531", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21875", "title": "Kebab", "text": "Kebab (kebap in Turkish, kabab in Iran, Afghanistan, India and Pakistan, also spelled kebob, kabob; ) means \"grilled (or broiled) meat\" in Persian and Turkish. Kebab is usually made of lamb and beef. Sometimes chicken and fish are used for some styles. Pork is never used by Muslims but is sometimes used by non-Muslim sellers. Muslims are not allowed to eat pork, for religious reasons.\nThere are many varieties of kebab and the term means different things in different countries. The generic term kebab usually refers to doner kebab or \"d\u00f6ner kebap\" in Europe and to Gyros in the United States, though its meaning can vary. In South Asia the term can refer to a whole range of items such as Chappali kabab, Shami kabab, Bihari kabab and so on.\nHistory.\nThere are evidence of hominin use of fire and cooking that was used in the Middle East around 790,000 years ago, and prehistoric hearths, earth ovens, and burnt animal bones were spread across Europe and the Middle East by at least 250,000 years ago. Excavations of the Minoan settlement of Akrotiri unearthed stone supports for skewers used before the 17th century BC. In Ancient Greek times, Homer in the \"Iliad\" (1.465) mentions pieces of meat roasted on spits (),\nVariations.\nThere are many types of kebab. Below are just a few.\nShish.\nShish kebabs are derived from the Turkish \u015fi\u015f which means skewer. They are cooked or grilled on skewers, over hot coals or wood. These kababs originated in Iran and Afghanistan and then spread out to Turkey, Azerbaijan (which was once a part of Iran), Pakistan, India. They are also very popular now in Europe and the United States.\nD\u00f6ner.\nD\u00f6ner kebap (which means \"rotating kebab\" in Turkish) is sliced lamb, beef, or chicken, that is slowly roasted on a vertical rotating spit.\nChappali.\nChappali kabab or chappal kabab or chapli kebab is a type of fried kebab. It started in the North-West Frontier Province (now Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) of present Pakistan and in Afghanistan. The name comes from the Pashto (and also Urdu) word for 'slipper' or 'shoe'. The kebab is actually called a 'slipper/shoe kebab'. Its shape is like that of a slipper or shoe.\nThis kebab is basically made from ground or minced beef or mutton mixed with tomatoes, onions and chillies, and a variety of herbs and spices. It is given its unique shape. It is fried in a special big pan. It is eaten with big \"roti\" bread typical of the Pathan region. Often \"Qahwa\" or green tea, is drunk with it or after it, to help digestion. \n\"Chappali kabab\" is very popular throughout Pakistan. It has spread to major cities of the country such as Lahore and Karachi. According to gourmets, the best ones are still found in Peshawar city and Mardan. Today, the popularity of these kebabs is also gradually spreading to other parts of the world, including the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and the United States. "}
{"id": "21876", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21876", "title": "Kebap", "text": ""}
{"id": "21877", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21877", "title": "Kabab", "text": ""}
{"id": "21878", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21878", "title": "Kebob", "text": ""}
{"id": "21879", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21879", "title": "Kabob", "text": ""}
{"id": "21880", "revid": "7179028", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21880", "title": "Halal", "text": "Halal (\u062d\u0644\u0627\u0644, hal\u0101l, halaal) is an Islamic Arabic term meaning \"permissible\". \nMuslims have strict rules of what they can and cannot eat:"}
{"id": "21881", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21881", "title": "Halaal", "text": ""}
{"id": "21882", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21882", "title": "Prelature of the Holy Cross and Opus Dei", "text": ""}
{"id": "21883", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21883", "title": "Surat", "text": "Surat is a city in the State of Gujarat, India. It is on the banks of the Tapti river. Surat used to be a large seaport. It is the eighth largest city in India. According to the 2020 reports on the \u2018cleanest cities of India\u2019, Surat ranked second out of 4,242 cities in India."}
{"id": "21884", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21884", "title": "Kanpur", "text": "Kanpur is a city in Uttar Pradesh, India. Almost three million people live in Kanpur.\nIt was called the Manchester of India."}
{"id": "21899", "revid": "14742", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21899", "title": "MSN Messenger", "text": ""}
{"id": "21900", "revid": "1103903", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21900", "title": "Web portal", "text": "An internet portal or web portal is a website used to enter the Internet. It can also be used to describe a website to enter certain parts of the Internet, like Wikipedia's . A web portal can be used to provide the user with personalised information such as employee training, safety manuals or a customer profile. A web portal can also be used to enhance the collaboration of information and improve the way employees, customers and suppliers interact with your business.\nA web portal is capable of handling both structured and unstructured information. For users, it provides ease of navigation, and for enterprises it provides significant cost savings, improved productivity and a way to establish a long-lasting relationship with users. \nMany ISPs have their own portals, but there are many other portals by other companies, like Microsoft's MSN, Ask.com, and Yahoo!."}
{"id": "21902", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21902", "title": "Internet portal", "text": ""}
{"id": "21906", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21906", "title": "Humanism", "text": "Humanism is a philosophy or a way of thinking about the world. Humanism is a set of ethics or ideas about how people should live and act. People who hold this set of ethics are called humanists. Humanists prefer critical thinking and evidence (rationalism and empiricism) over acceptance of dogma or superstition. \nIn modern times, humanism is close to secularism. It refers to a non-theistic approach to life, looking to science instead of religious dogma in order to understand the world. The term was made widely known by scientists in the mid-20th century. Many wanted to recognise human values, but without depending on religion as the main source of values.\nViews held by many humanists include:\nHistory.\nHumanist ideas were discussed in Ancient Greece, from Thales to Anaxagoras and Protagoras. The teachings of Zarathushtra and Lao Tzu had strong elements of humanism, and there are many other examples.\nThe writings of the ancient Greeks were studied in the 1400s during the Renaissance. However, in this period the term \"humanism\" came to mean educated in the humanities, a rather different kind of idea. Petrarch is often cited as the first modern humanist, but he pointed backwards to classical authors. The modern meaning of humanism is more to do with using science to make the world a better place. \nA comment by the English mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead in 1925 was "}
{"id": "21910", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21910", "title": "The Guardian", "text": "The Guardian is a British newspaper. It is published every day, except on Sunday. It is owned by the same company as The Observer, which only publishes on Sunday. \"The Guardian\" is edited by Katharine Viner.\nHistory.\nThe newspaper was founded in 1821. It was founded by textile traders and merchants. The Guardian was seen as \"an organ of the middle class\", or, in the words of C.P. Scott's son Ted, \"a paper that will remain bourgeois to the last\". In 2005, Sir Max Hastings stated that he writes for \"The Guardian\" \"because it is read by the new establishment\", reflecting the paper's growing influence.\nUntil 1959 \"The Guardian\" was called \"The Manchester Guardian\".\nThree of the four people who wrote leaders for the \"Guardian\" joined the Social Democratic Party on its foundation in 1982. The paper supported Tony Blair when he wanted to lead the Labour Party and to become Prime Minister.\nIn 1999 theguardian.com started. At the time it was a website called Guardian Unlimited.\nCharacteristics.\n\"The Guardian\" describes itself as centre-left."}
{"id": "21912", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21912", "title": "Magic (Harry Potter)", "text": ""}
{"id": "21914", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21914", "title": "Algae", "text": "Algae (one alga, but several algae) are a type of plant-like living things that can make food from sunlight by photosynthesis. The study of algae is called phycology or algology.\nThe term covers a range of photosynthetic organisms, and many are not closely related. They are a polyphyletic group. \nThe term lumps together many different kinds of organisms. They have in common only that they are autotrophic: they use natural sources of energy and simple inorganic materials to build their forms. As non-vascular plants they do not have the kind of cell and tissue structure of land plants. They are a convenient but very loose term. Only in recent years has it become clear how different the many kinds of algae are.\nEtymology and study.\nThe singular is the Latin word for 'seaweed' and retains that meaning in English. Although some say that it is related to Latin , 'be cold'. But, no reason is known to associate seaweed with temperature. A more likely source is , 'binding, entwining'.\nThe Ancient Greek word for 'seaweed' was (), which could either mean the seaweed (probably red algae) or a red dye that is got from it.\nBiology and taxonomy.\nAlgae are a large and diverse group of simple, typically autotrophic organisms. Some have one cell and others have many cells. The largest and most complex marine algae are called seaweeds. They are like plants, and \"simple\" because they lack the many distinct organs found in land plants. For that reason they are \"not\" classified as plants.\nThough the prokaryotic \"cyanobacteria\" (formerly referred to as \"blue-green algae\") were included as \"algae\" in older textbooks, it is not now. The term \"algae\" is now used for eukaryotic organisms. All true algae have a nucleus within a membrane and chloroplasts inside one or more membranes. However, algae are definitely \"not\" a monophyletic group, as they do not all descend from a common algal ancestor. Modern taxonomists propose splitting them up into monophyletic groups, but not everyone agrees how to do this.\nAlgae do not have the same structures that land plants do, such as leaves, roots, and other organs. Nearly all algae have parts that do photosynthesis the same way as cyanobacteria. They make oxygen, unlike other photosynthetic bacteria such as \"purple\" and \"green\" bacteria. Some unicellular species use only external energy sources and have limited or no photosynthetic parts.\nFossilized filamentous algae from the Vindhya basin have been dated back to 1.6 to 1.7 billion years ago.\nTypes of algae.\nBelow are some important kinds of algae. The list is not complete.\nLife style.\nEcology.\nAlgae are usually found in damp places or water, and are common on land and water. However, algae on land are usually inconspicuous and are far more common in moist, tropical regions than dry ones. Algae do not have vascular tissues and other adaptations to live on land, but they can endure dryness and other conditions in symbiosis with a fungus as lichen.\nThe various sorts of algae play significant roles in aquatic ecology. Microscopic forms that live suspended in the water column are called phytoplankton. They provide the food base for most marine food chains. Kelp grows mostly in shallow marine waters. Some are used as human food or harvested for agar or fertilizer. Kelp can grow in large stands called kelp forests. These forests prevent some of the damage from waves. Many different species live in them, including sea urchins, sea otters, and abalone.\nSome algae may harm other species. Some algae may reproduce a lot, and make an algal bloom. These algae may make protective toxins which kill fish in the water. Dinoflagellates make a compound that turns the flesh of fish into slime. Then the algae eats this nutritious liquid.\nSymbiosis.\nAlgae have evolved a number of symbiotic partnerships with other organisms. The most famous is the plant-like lichen, which are each formed by a fungus with an alga. It is a highly successful life-form, and twenty thousand 'species' are known. In all cases the lichen are quite different in appearance and life-style from either constituent; it is possibly the most complete symbiosis known. Both constituents gain from their access to niches with low nutrient value, which is where lichen are found.\nLess well known are the algal relationships with animals. Reef-building corals are basically social Cnidarian polyps. Corals are dependent on light, because the algae are important partners, and they require light. Corals have evolved structures, often tree-like, which offer the algae maximum access to light. The coral weakens the algal cell walls, and digests about 80% of the food synthesised by the algae. The corals' waste-products provide nutrients for the algae so, as with lichen, both partners gain from the association. The algae are golden-brown flagellate algae, often of the genus \"Symbiodinium\". A curious feature of the partnership is that the coral may eject the algae in hard times, and regain them later. The ejection of the algal partner is called \"bleaching\", because the coral loses its colour.p200\nOther types of Cnideria, such as sea anemones and jellyfish, also contain algae. Jellyfish with algae behave so that their partners get the best light during the day, and descend to depths at night, where the water is rich in nitrates and brown with decay. Sea slugs and clams are also well known for harbouring algae. Both groups are molluscs. The sea slugs graze on coral, and are the same colour as the coral they graze. They are able to separate the algae from the polyp tissues they digest. The algal cells are moved to its tentacles, where they continue to live. The otherwise defenceless slug gains both camouflage and nutrition.p204 The giant clam keeps algae in its mantle, which is revealed when the clam is open. The coloured mantle has places where the skin is transparent, and acts like a lens to concentrate light on the algae beneath. When the algae get too numerous, the clam digests them.p203\nVarious other marine invertebrate groups have members which symbiose with algae. Flatworms (Platyhelminths) and Polychaete worms (Annelids) are two such groups."}
{"id": "21915", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21915", "title": "Alga (Korday district)", "text": "Alga (; ) is a hamlet in the Korday District of Kazakhstan. It is one of several communities in Kazakhstan with this name. The A-2 highway from Bishkek to Almaty runs through the town. A significant architectural feature is its mosque."}
{"id": "21916", "revid": "1117958", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21916", "title": "Kelp forest", "text": "Kelp forests are a type of marine ecosystem that is present around colonies of kelp; they contain rich biodiversity. Kelp can stretch 2-30 meters or more (up to 60 m in \"Macrocystis pyrifera\") from their anchors on the sea floor to the surface. It provides a vertical infrastructure that is home to many fish and invertebrate species. Kelp forests also often attract mammalian visitors, including whales, sea lions, sea otters, and SCUBA-diving humans.\nKelp forests draw their name from an analogy to forests on land.\nIn some places, sea urchins eat so many kelp plants that the kelp forest becomes an urchin barren.\nEcosystem architecture.\nGiant kelp uses gas-filled floats to keep the plant suspended, allowing the kelp blades near the ocean surface to capture light for photosynthesis.\nThe architecture of a kelp forest ecosystem is based on its physical structure, which influences the associated species that define its community structure. Structurally, the ecosystem includes three guilds of kelp and two guilds occupied by other algae:\nMultiple kelp species often co-exist within a forest; the term understory canopy refers to the stipitate and prostrate kelps. For example, a \"Macrocystis\" canopy may extend many meters above the seafloor towards the ocean surface, while an understory of the kelps \"Eisenia\" and \"Pterygophora\" reaches upward only a few meters. Beneath these kelps, a benthic assemblage of foliose red algae may occur. The dense vertical structure with overlying canopy forms a system of microenvironments similar to those observed in a terrestrial forest, with a sunny canopy region, a partially shaded middle, and darkened seafloor. Each guild has associated organisms, which vary in their levels of dependence on the habitat, and the assemblage of these organisms can vary with kelp morphologies. For example, in California, \"Macrocystis pyrifera\" forests, the nudibranch, \"Melibe leonina\", and skeleton shrimp, \"Caprella californica,\" are closely associated with surface canopies; the kelp perch \"Brachyistius frenatus\", rockfish \"Sebastes\" spp., and many other fishes are found within the stipitate understory; brittle stars and turban snails \"Tegula\" spp. are closely associated with the kelp holdfast, while various herbivores, such as sea urchins and abalone, live under the prostrate canopy; many seastars, hydroids, and benthic fishes live among the benthos; solitary corals, various gastropods, and echinoderms live over the encrusting coralline algae. In addition, pelagic fishes and marine mammals are loosely associated with kelp forests, usually interacting near the edges as they visit to feed on resident organisms."}
{"id": "21917", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21917", "title": "Symbiosis", "text": "Symbiosis (pl. symbioses) means living together. It describes close and long-term relationships between different species. The term was\nused by Anton de Bary in 1879, as \"the living together of unlike organisms\". \nA symbiont is an organism living in a relationship with another species in which one or both get benefits. When one species lives inside another species, or a microscopic symbiont lives inside the cells of a host, it is called an endosymbiont.\nThe relevance of symbiosis is its frequency and its evolutionary significance. There appear to be no higher plants or animals without symbionts. Those symbionts are of great importance to the larger organisms, who in most cases would be unable to live as they do without their symbionts. Mycorrhiza in higher plants, and gut flora in insects and vertebrates are examples. Humans are no exception.\nFurthermore, most of these associations are between organisms not just from different species, but from different kingdoms. And lastly, the cells of all eukaryotes contain organelles which are descendants of symbiotic relationships which began at least a billion years ago. Mitochondria and plastids are examples. The conclusion must be that symbiosis has been highly significant in the evolution of life.\nDefinition.\nThe definition of symbiosis has been controversial. Some believe symbiosis should only refer to persistent mutualisms, while others believe it should apply to all kinds of long-term biological interactions.\nAfter 130 years of debate, current biology and ecology textbooks now use the latter \"de Bary\" definition or an even broader definition (where symbiosis means all species interactions). The restrictive definition (where symbiosis means mutualism only) is no longer used.\nThe widest definition includes parasitism (in which one organism is helped and the other organism is hurt), mutualism (in which both organisms are helped), commensalism (in which one organism is helped and the other is not affected), and competition (in which both organisms are hurt).\nTypes of symbiosis.\nThe various forms of symbiosis include:\nType 1: Partners keep their bodies separate.\nSymbiosis does not always benefit both partners. This is what may happen:\nType 2: Partners live as one organism.\nThis kind of symbiosis is called endosymbiosis. Examples are:\nAlmost for certain, this happened to form the eukaryote cell. That's the type of cell all animals and plants are made of. The organelles inside the cell, such as mitochondria and chloroplasts, contain some DNA. This DNA is the remnant of a once separate bacterium. The theory is that the eukaryote cell evolved by the fusion of several bacteria or archaea organisms."}
{"id": "21926", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21926", "title": "Al Ain", "text": "Al Ain (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0639\u064a\u0646) is a city in the United Arab Emirates. The city name literally means \"the spring\" or \"the eye\" in Arabic. This name come from the water sources in the area. The city is in the emirate of Abu Dhabi, right next to the border with Oman. It is often called the 'Garden City of the Persian Gulf' because of the many parks, tree-lined avenues and decorative roundabouts within the city. Al Ain, Abu Dhabi and Dubai form a kind of geographic triangle in the center of the country. Each city is around 150 kilometers from the other two. \nEconomy.\nAl Ain is the fourth largest metropolitan area by population in the Emirates, with a population of 348,000 (2003 census estimate). There are more Emirati nationals in Al Ain than other places in the country, but most who live there are people who left other countries, particularly from the Indian sub-continent. There are fewer Western people than in the larger centers of Abu Dhabi and Dubai. This gives Al Ain a more 'Arabic' look and feel, compared to the larger cities of the Emirates.\nHistory.\nPeople have lived in Al Ain for more than 4000 years, and the area is central to the cultural heritage of the country. There are many underground water springs in the area. This explains why people wanted to live there. Traces of its past remain, including camel racing and breeding. The ancient \"falaj\" system of irrigation is still in use in some areas. The system brings underground water to people by a network of tunnels that come out into open channels. The flow of water in the channels can be controlled.\nTourism.\nAl Ain is becoming a place that tourists visit, with attractions such as Jebel Hafeet, a 1340 metre high mountain that dominates the surrounding area. Many tourists like to visit the mineral springs at the base and drive to the top of this mountain for sunset. Al Ain regularly records the highest summer temperatures in the country, but the dry desert air makes it a welcome escape from the coastal humidity of the larger cities. Other attractions include the Al Ain Oasis in the city centre, and other oases around the area, cool places to escape the summer heat, a zoo, amusement park named \"Fun City\", many well kept parks, popular with families in the summer evenings, a heritage village, as well as malls and other modern sites. Important buildings include United Arab Emirates University, Higher Colleges of Technology, well-equipped medical facilities, including the teaching hospital at Tawam, military training areas and Al Ain International Airport.\nSports.\nThe city is home to the successful association football (soccer) club, Al Ain FC."}
{"id": "21928", "revid": "1052700", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21928", "title": "Jutland", "text": "Jutland (Danish: \"Jylland\"; German: \"J\u00fctland\") is a peninsula in northern Europe. It forms the mainland part of Denmark and a northern part of Germany. It separates the North Sea from the Baltic Sea. Its terrain is relatively flat, with low hills and peat bogs. It has an area of 29,775\u00a0km\u00b2 (11,496 square miles), and a population of 2,491,852 (2004).\nThe northern two thirds of the peninsula are occupied by the westernmost portion of the Kingdom of Denmark. There is no separate name for the Danish portion of the peninsula, so it is simply called the same name. \nThe northernmost part of Jutland became an island following a flood in 1825; the Limfjord now separates it from the mainland. This island is called \"Vendsyssel-Thy or N\u00f8rrejyske \u00d8\" (\"North Jutlandic Island\") and is still commonly reckoned as part of the peninsula; it is also partly coterminous with the county and future region called North Jutland. \nThe southern third is made up of the German Bundesland of Schleswig-Holstein, with the duchies of Schleswig (also S\u00f8nderjylland/Southern Jutland) and Holstein. Both duchies have passed back and forth between the Danes and various German rulers. In the last border movement, Denmark regained North Schleswig (\"Nordslesvig\" in Danish) by plebiscite in 1920. Southern Schleswig remained German.\nThe River Elbe forms the southern border of Jutland with the city of Hamburg on its shore. The Danish Wadden Sea Islands and the North Frisian Islands stretch along the southwest coast of Jutland in the German Bight.\nThere are two bridges which link the central part ofJutland to the island of Funen to the east. They are the Little Belt Bridge and the New Little Belt Bridge. The roads which use these bridges are part of the European road network.\nCities.\nThe largest cities on the Jutland Peninsula are:"}
{"id": "21929", "revid": "6414416", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21929", "title": "Plebiscite", "text": "A plebiscite or referendum is a type of voting, or of proposing laws. Some definitions of 'plebiscite' suggest that it is a type of vote to change the constitution or government of a country. Others define it as the opposite. Australia defines 'referendum' as a vote to change the constitution and 'plebiscite' as a vote that does not affect the constitution.\nThere are two types of result\nIt usually depends on the country's history and constitution what sort of referendum/plebiscite is used. In Switzerland a referendum is usually mandatory, because the people are seen as the source of the government's mandate (power) to govern. For example, during Switzerland's basic income campaign the country utilized a national referendum for the polling. \nIn the United Kingdom referendums have only been advisory, because the government says that the people elected to Parliament make the decisions. The referendum on the independence of Scotland was an exception. It \"was\" legally binding, but it was not a referendum of the UK electorate. It was restricted to present residents of Scotland.\nAn example of a proposed plebiscite was the 2011 decision by Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou to let the Greek people vote on whether the heavily indebted nation would accept a \u20ac130 billion bailout package from the European Union. The idea shocked eurozone nations, as a \"no\" vote could mean Greece defaulting on its national debt, and leaving the European Union and the eurozone. However, the vote was cancelled. \nAnother example was the voting on the European Constitution in 2005. The vote took place in some countries. France and The Netherlands had a \"referendum\" on the subject. In both states, the voters said no to the proposal and no constitution was made. \nThe separate simultaneous referendums held on 24 April 2004 in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and the Republic of Cyprus on the comprehensive settlement plan of the UN Secretary-General provides yet another example of such a vote. The Plan was approved in the Turkish Cypriot referendum by 65%, while it was rejected in the Greek Cypriot referendum by 75%.\nProblems with referendums.\nMany political problems can be solved by asking the people their opinion because the supporters of the argument will be forced to accept the decision of the people. However:"}
{"id": "21930", "revid": "5475757", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21930", "title": "Referendum", "text": ""}
{"id": "21931", "revid": "1113595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21931", "title": "Dubai", "text": "The city of Dubai is the largest and most populated city in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the capital city of the emirate of Dubai, UAE. The city is sometimes called \"Dubai City\" to prevent it from being mixed up with the emirate.\nDubai is a city and emirate in the United Arab Emirates known for luxury shopping, ultramodern architecture and a lively nightlife scene. Burj Khalifa, an 830m-tall tower, dominates the skyscraper-filled skyline. At its foot lies Dubai Fountain, with jets and lights choreographed to music. On artificial islands just offshore is Atlantis, The Palm, a resort with water and marine-animal parks.\nHistory.\nThere are records of the town of Dubai from 1799. The city was a dependent of Abu Dhabi until 1833. The town of Dubai was an important port of call for foreign tradesmen (chiefly Indians), who settled in the town. Until the 1930s, the town was known for its pearls.\nClimate.\nDubai has a hot desert climate. Summers are extremely hot, windy, and humid. The highest recorded temperature in the UAE is 52.1 \u00b0C (126 \u00b0F), recorded in July 2002. \nAccording to the UN, about 14 percent of the world population will face water scarcity by the year 2025. This shortage of water is expected to be worse in arid countries like the UAE. The UAE cloud seeding initiative is part of the government\u2019s attempt to deal with the existing and future water needs of the country\u2019s growing population.\nSpecific rules.\nDubai has strict rules like:\nOther websites.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "21932", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21932", "title": "Exclave", "text": "An exclave is strip of land that belongs to an entity (like a country or a region) but that is not connected to it by land (islands are not counted). The strip of land is surrounded by other political entities. A good example is Kaliningrad Oblast (the region around the Russian city Kaliningrad). It belongs to the Russian Federation, but is separated from the rest of that country by territory belonging to Lithuania and Poland.\nAlthough both meanings are close, an exclave might not be an enclave. An enclave is completely surrounded by one other country. For example, Kaliningrad is surrounded not by one state, but by two: Lithuania and Poland. It also borders the Baltic Sea. It is not an enclave. On the other hand, the Spanish exclave of Llivia is an enclave in France.\nMany exclaves today have some of idea of becoming independent, especially if the exclave is far away from the mainland.\nA much more obscure use means, in medical discussion, a detached part of an organ, as of the pancreas, thyroid, or other gland.\nThe lists below are of various types of exclaves that are not enclaves.\nSubnational exclaves.\nExclaves of administrative divisions below the national level.\n\"Practical\" exclaves.\nSome territories are not geographically detached from their motherland. Nevertheless, they are more easily reached by entering a foreign country. Very often, this is because of their location in a hilly area. It may also be because the only road enters that foreign place before coming back to the mother country. These territories may be called \"practical exclaves,\" \"pene-exclaves\" or \"quasi-exclaves\" and can be found along many borders, particularly those that are not heavily defended. They will only be attached to the motherland via an extremely small or thin slice of land.\nHistorical exclaves.\nlater became part of Poland and Russia (see Kaliningrad above)."}
{"id": "21933", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21933", "title": "Enclave", "text": "In general use, an enclave can be any special area of a bigger area of land, such as a part of a city that has different taxes than the rest of the city.\nIn political geography, an enclave is a piece of land which has a different country totally around it. If another country has sovereignty over it, it is also called an \"exclave\" of that other country. It is usually landlocked, meaning it is completely encased by the surrounding country\nExclaves can also exist within a country. This is when some administrative regions have \"holes\" (of other such regions) in them.\nThe word \"enclave\" is a relatively new word in the language of diplomacy: Diplomats are used to speaking French. The word comes from late Latin \"inclavatus\", which can be translated as \"shut in, locked up\" (with a key, from Latin \"clavis\", key). The word got in the English language in the year 1868. \"exclave\" (with a similar meaning) followed 3 decades later.\nEnclaves may be created for a variety of historical, political or geographical reasons. Some areas have been left as enclaves simply because a river changed its course.\nSince living in an enclave can be very inconvenient and many agreements have to be found by both countries over mail addresses, power supply or passage rights, enclaves tend to be eliminated and many cases that existed before have now been removed. Sometimes it is the case, that enclaves are traded for one another.\nIn English Church history, subnational enclaves were known as peculiars (see also Royal Peculiar).\nEnclaved countries.\nSome enclaves are countries that are not part of any other country, and therefore not exclaves. Three such countries exist:"}
{"id": "21934", "revid": "5207905", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21934", "title": "Panhandle", "text": "A panhandle is a word used in geography. What people mean when they talk about panhandles is a narrow strip of land, that is surrounded on all sides except one, by one or more countries or regions. The strip of land is connected to the country or region it belongs to on one side only. This looks like the handle of a frying pan.\nPanhandles include:"}
{"id": "21938", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21938", "title": "Highrise", "text": ""}
{"id": "21941", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21941", "title": "Angels", "text": ""}
{"id": "21942", "revid": "1078755", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21942", "title": "New town", "text": "A new town, planned community, or planned city is a kind of city that is designed by architects and engineers before it is built. Most cities and towns just develop over the years, without a clear plan. Urban planning is only used for later expansion. \nPlanned communities are designed with separate districts of the city for parks, stores, homes, and offices. Many planned communities have a transportation system for commuters.\nThere are many examples of capital cities being planned throughout history: Baghdad, Iraq; Washington D.C., United States; New Delhi, India; Canberra, Australia; Bras\u00edlia, Brazil; and Naypyidaw, Myanmar were all planned."}
{"id": "21943", "revid": "102583", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21943", "title": "Engineers", "text": ""}
{"id": "21944", "revid": "102586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21944", "title": "Architects", "text": ""}
{"id": "21945", "revid": "7697843", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21945", "title": "Park", "text": "A park is an open place in a city or town for nature. There are often trees, benches, statues, and ponds in a park. Some parks built in big cities are very large. These can have fountains or picnic areas.\nA park is an open area,often found with trees,benches,statues,etc.\nThere is also lots of nature around, such as flowers, animals, trees, and much more.\nIt is mostly used for recreational activities such as walking, exercising, cycling, playing,etc.\nA play park can even have swings,slides and some adventurous activities.\nSometimes, countries or regions set up \"national parks\". These are usually large areas of land. Those areas are made to protect the habitats of animals. Very often, a special permit is necessary to enter. Building things in the park is usually forbidden, or needs a special permit.\nAn example of a national park is Yellowstone National Park."}
{"id": "21946", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21946", "title": "Trees", "text": ""}
{"id": "21947", "revid": "102590", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21947", "title": "Benches", "text": ""}
{"id": "21948", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21948", "title": "Ponds", "text": ""}
{"id": "21949", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21949", "title": "Pond", "text": "A pond is a body of water smaller than a lake. Ponds support wide range of wildlife: ducks, turtles, swans, small fish, and frogs can live in a pond. Usually, in most ponds sunlight can reach to bottom. In some cases ponds do not last all year round. This type of pond is called a vernal pond, or ephemeral, seasonal, or temporary wetlands. These types of ponds do not have any fish. Some ponds are now getting polluted because of humans.\n \n "}
{"id": "21950", "revid": "102593", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21950", "title": "Frogs", "text": ""}
{"id": "21953", "revid": "102596", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21953", "title": "Swans", "text": ""}
{"id": "21954", "revid": "102598", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21954", "title": "Ducks", "text": ""}
{"id": "21955", "revid": "508885", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21955", "title": "Swan", "text": "A swan (\"Cygnini\") is a kind of water bird, from the genera \"Cygnus\" and \"Coscoroba\". They are in the subfamily Anserinae, in the family Anatidae, which also includes geese and ducks.\nMany swans live in colder places, such as northern Europe, Asia and North America. They live on water. They swim on top of the water and eat plants off the bottom of ponds, lakes, or oceans. They also eat insects and other small animals. A baby swan is called a cygnet.\nSwans are tough, strong birds who will stand no nonsense from dogs or cats. They may open their wings as a warning, but from then on a person is advised to keep clear. Swans are highly protective of their nests. They will attack anything they see as a threat to their chicks, including humans. \nDescription.\nThe swans are some of the largest flying birds. They are large in size and have large feet and long necks. The males are usually bigger and heavier than females. The mute swan, trumpeter swan, and whooper swan are the largest swans. They can be over 1.5m (60 inches) long. They can weigh over 15kg (33 pounds). Their wingspans (this means the length of both wings) can be almost 3m (10 ft). \nMost swans are white. They are found in the Northern Hemisphere. This means they are found in Europe, Asia and North America. However, the black swan is black with a red beak. It lives in Australia. The black necked swan has white flight feathers, and black outer feathers. It lives in South America. They also have a small area of skin between the eyes and beak that has no feathers. This area can be different colors, such as yellow (for example, on a Bewick's swan) or orange (for example, on a mute swan).\nWild swans migrate. They spend the cold part of the year eating and getting fat in one place and move to a warmer place to lay eggs and raise chicks, called cygnets.\nThe coscoroba swan is different to the other swans. Some scientists think it is more like a duck or a goose. It is the smaller than the other swans. This swan lives in South America.\nClimate change.\nBewick's swans used to spend a lot of time in Ireland and Britain and the Netherlands, but scientists say they have been moving east into Germany. They spend less time in their winter feeding grounds than they did in 1970. Scientists say they are following the changes in temperature in Europe. The scientists found that individual swans do not change where they like to go during their own lifetimes. Instead, different generations of swans go to different places from their parents and grandparents."}
{"id": "21957", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21957", "title": "Pupa", "text": "A pupa (plural: pupae or pupas) is part of becoming an adult for some insects, like some butterflies, moths, beetles, flies, and bees. The pupal stage comes after being a larva; the next stage is adulthood.\nThe pupa stage of a butterfly, called a chrysalis (plural \"chrysalids\"), is a well-known example of a pupa because they are often found in the open."}
{"id": "21958", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21958", "title": "Cygnet", "text": ""}
{"id": "21959", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21959", "title": "Cygnets", "text": ""}
{"id": "21960", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21960", "title": "Planned city", "text": ""}
{"id": "21962", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21962", "title": "Paul", "text": "Paul might mean:"}
{"id": "21963", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21963", "title": "Goose", "text": "Goose (plural geese, genus Anser) is a genus containing 11 species within the swan subfamily.\nThis family also includes the swans, which are mostly larger than geese, and the ducks, which are smaller and have short necks.\nGeese are famously gregarious: they like to stick together. They can be moved in large herds because of this feature of their behaviour. Both as chicks and as adults, geese show collective animal behaviour. Geese migrate in groups in the spring and fall, flying together in a V-shape.\nA male goose is called a \"gander\" and a baby goose is called a \"gosling\". A group of geese is called a \"gaggle\"."}
{"id": "21964", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21964", "title": "Geese", "text": ""}
{"id": "21965", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21965", "title": "S\u00e9n\u00e9gal", "text": ""}
{"id": "21966", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21966", "title": "Ovary", "text": "Ovaries (Singular: Ovary) are organs found in female organisms. Ovaries are part of the reproductive system needed to reproduce sexually. \nMost vertebrates have ovaries. Usually animals have two ovaries. Birds usually have only one working ovary; snakes have one ovary in front of the other. The ovaries are similar to testicles in men.\nAnatomy.\nOvaries are shaped like eggs and are around 3 cm by 1.5 cm by 1.5 cm. The ovary is found in the side walls of the pelvis. \nEach ovary is attached to the Fallopian tube. Usually each ovary takes turns releasing eggs every month.\nUses.\nOvaries have two purposes:\nMenstruation.\nDuring menstruation, an ovum is released from the ovary and enters one of the Fallopian tubes. There, the ovum can be fertilised. Ovaries have a certain number of eggs in them, so when eggs stop being released, this is the start of the menopause. During this time, female hormones stop being produced."}
{"id": "21967", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21967", "title": "Insects", "text": ""}
{"id": "21968", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21968", "title": "Duckling", "text": ""}
{"id": "21969", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21969", "title": "Gosling", "text": ""}
{"id": "21970", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21970", "title": "Planned cities", "text": ""}
{"id": "21971", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21971", "title": "New towns", "text": ""}
{"id": "21972", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21972", "title": "Planned communities", "text": ""}
{"id": "21973", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21973", "title": "Axe", "text": "An axe (or ax) is an ancient tool. It is used to shape, split and cut wood.\nThe hand axe was probably the first tool in the Stone Age. It did not have a handle.\nIn the past, axes were used as weapons by soldiers. Today, axes are usually related to woodcutters and firemen.\nAxes are simple machines. They are in the category of wedges. They are usually made of some sort of metal, mainly steel or iron. They can have a metal or wooden handle. "}
{"id": "21975", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21975", "title": "Rhinoceros", "text": "A rhinoceros (rhino for short) is any animal in the family Rhinocerotidae. They are in the order Perissodactyla, or odd-toed ungulates. There are five living species. Two of these species are native to Africa. Three of these species are also native to Southern parts of Asia. \nHabitat.\nAll five rhinoceros species are native to Africa or Asia. The two species in Africa are the White rhinoceros and the Black rhinoceros. The three species in Asia (including islands of Indonesia) are the Javan rhinoceros, Sumatran rhinoceros, and Indian rhinoceros.\nLife.\nThe rhinoceros is a herbivore. Its favourite food is plants, branches and bushes (if it is a browser species), or grass (if it is a grazer species).\nRhinoceroses have a large horn on the nose. Their horns are not like those of other horned mammals: the rhinoceros' horn is made of keratin packed together very tightly. \nThe rhinoceroses can weigh up to and be up to tall.\nRhinoceros and humans.\nOnly the white rhinoceros is not in critical danger of becoming extinct. They are protected, but hunted mainly by poachers, for their horns. The horns are used in Asian medicine, similar to elephants and tigers, and for dagger handles in Yemen and Oman. Loss of habitat is also a danger to rhinos. Governments have made logging their habitat and poaching illegal."}
{"id": "21976", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21976", "title": "Alcoholic proof", "text": "Alcoholic proof is a measure of how much ethanol there is in an alcoholic drink. It is commonly used the world over, on the basis that 100 degrees proof is the equivalent of 50 % alcohol by volume (ABV or Alc/Vol). In the United States, it is double the percentage of ABV.\nWhere it comes from.\nThis system was introduced in the 18th century. The British claim that this term has a nautical background. Every evening, sailors would line up for their daily quota of grog/rum. This had to first be proved to be as strong as promised and not watered down. The spirit was tested with gunpowder: a mixture of water and alcohol \"proved\" itself when it could be poured on a small amount of gunpowder and still light up the wet powder. If the powder did not ignite, the mixture had too much water in it and the grog was considered below proof. It might have happened earlier, as the Americans claim that this definition came about in the 17th century when European traders began making a large quantity of distilled spirits and wine available to American Indians. The very same process led to the nickname \"firewater\", this time given by Native Americans. There is no record of the finite strength of the distilled spirits in the context of its sale to or consumption by Native Americans.\nA \"proven\" solution was defined as 100 degrees proof (100\u00b0). People have found out that this takes 57.15% ethanol. This value is still used as the British definition. A simpler ratio to remember is \"seven to four\": 70\u00b0 proof is 40% alcohol by volume. \nA hydrometer can be used to measure the precise proof of a spirit. This test has gone through many formal changes.\nLaws.\nEU.\nThe European Union member nations have broadly adopted the recommendation of the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML) which measures percentage of alcohol by volume at 20\u00a0\u00b0C.\nBritish proof spirits.\nIn Britain, this replaced the Sikes hydrometer system (based on proof spirit) which was used since 1816, although officially the \"Customs and Excise Act of 1952\" defined \"spirits of proof strength\" (or proof spirits):\nPreviously, Clarke's hydrometer had been used since the 1740s when Customs and Excise and London brewers and distillers began to use Clarke's hydrometer.\nUnited States.\nIn the definition of the United States, the proof number is twice the percentage of the alcohol content measured by volume at a temperature of 60\u00b0F (15.5\u00b0C). Therefore, \"80 proof\" is 40% alcohol by volume (most of the other 60% is water). If a 150 proof beverage is mixed half-and-half with water, the drink is 75 proof.\nUS Federal regulation (CFR 27 5.37 Alcohol Content) requires that liquor labels state the percentage alcohol by volume (sometimes abbreviated ABV). The regulations permit (but do not require) a statement of the degrees proof as long as it is right next to the percentage alcohol by volume.\nAlcohol during production.\nAlcohol is produced by yeast during the process of fermentation. The other product of fermentation is carbon dioxide, which is the gas that can make beer bottles explode or blow their tops off. The amount of alcohol in the finished liquid depends on how much sugar there was at the beginning for the yeast to convert into alcohol. In beer, the alcohol is generally 3% to 12% (6 to 24 proof) and usually about 4% to 6% (8 to 12 proof). Depending on the strain of yeast, wines top out at about 14% to 16% (28 to 32 proof), because that is the point in the fermentation process where the alcohol concentration denatures the yeast. Since the 1990s, a few alcohol-tolerant 'superyeast' strains have become commercially available, which can ferment up to 20%.\nVery few microorganisms can live in alcoholic solutions. The main three are yeast, \"Brettanomyces\", and \"Acetobacter\". In what is essentially disinfection, yeast keeps multiplying as long as there is sugar to \"eat\", gradually increasing the alcoholic content of the solution and killing off all other microorganisms, and eventually themselves. There are \"fortified\" wines with a higher alcohol concentration than that because stronger alcohol has been mixed with them.\nStronger liquors are distilled after fermentation is complete to separate the alcoholic liquid from the remains of the grain, fruit, or whatever it was made from. The idea of distillation is that a mixture of liquids is heated, the one with the lowest boiling point will evaporate (or \"boil off\") first, and then the one with the next lowest boiling point, and so on. The catch is that water and alcohol form a mixture (called an azeotrope) that has a lower boiling point than either one of them, so what distills off first is that mixture of 95% alcohol and 5% water. Thus a distilled liquor cannot be stronger than 95% (190 proof); there are other techniques for separating liquids that can produce 100% ethanol (or \"absolute alcohol\"), but they are used only for scientific or industrial purposes. 100% ethanol does not stay 100% for very long, because it is hygroscopic and absorbs water out of the atmosphere."}
{"id": "21977", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21977", "title": "Acetobacter", "text": "Acetobacter is a kind of bacteria. These bacteria are \nknown by their ability to change alcohol to acetic acid in the presence of air. There are several species within this genus, and there are other bacteria that can form acetic acid under different conditions; but all of the \"Acetobacter\" are known by this ability.\nWhy Acetobacter is important.\n\"Acetobacter\" are important to people, because:\nSometimes, \"Acetobacter\" is not wanted. It can be killed by adding preservatives like Sulfur dioxides, or by getting rid of the air when the wine is stored. "}
{"id": "21978", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21978", "title": "Archbishop of Canterbury", "text": "The Archbishop of Canterbury is the spiritual leader of the Church of England and in the Anglican Communion the leader of its mother church. He is the head of the Church, and lives in the English city of Canterbury. The Archbishop is chosen by the English monarch (the church's \"supreme governor\"), under guidance from senior bishops, acting in cooperation with the prime minister of the UK. \nThe office of Archbishop of Canterbury was founded in the year 597. In that year, Saint Augustine came to England, to the area called Kent. He had been sent by the Pope to convince the local people to become Christians. The people accepted him and Christianity when their King (Ethelbert of Kent) became a Christian. Augustine became the first bishop in the kingdom of Kent and was later recognised as archbishop when a second diocese was created. Since then, there has been an Archbishop at Canterbury in Kent.\nThe Archbishop of Canterbury used to be head of the Roman Catholic Church in England, but in the early 16th century the English church broke away from the Roman church. The new church called itself the Church of England, and now the Archbishop is the leader of that church. The current Archbishop is Justin Welby (from 2013). \nThe archbishop oversees the Province of Canterbury that is all the Church of England dioceses in the south and midlands of England. The dioceses of Wales were also within the Province of Canterbury until 1920 when the Church in Wales became independent. In the north of England another archbishop has the Diocese of York and other northern dioceses (including the diocese of Sodor and Man) to oversee. Both archbishops are members of the House of Lords and rank very high in the official English order of precedence. When a new monarch is crowned the placing of the crown on his head is done by the Archbishop of Canterbury. The principal home of the archbishops is at Lambeth Palace in the south of London rather than at Canterbury itself. Within the Diocese of Canterbury (which consists of eastern Kent and a small enclave in Surrey) the archbishop has at least two assistant bishops.\nJustin Welby (formerly the Bishop of Durham) became Archbishop on 21 March 2013."}
{"id": "21979", "revid": "1073251", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21979", "title": "Ethanol", "text": "Ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol, grain alcohol or just alcohol, is a flammable, colorless chemical compound. Its chemical formula is C2H5OH, also written as C2H6O. It is the active part of alcoholic drinks, which are drunk in most cultures worldwide. It is also used as a solvent because it can dissolve many other chemicals and is not very toxic. Yeast makes most of the ethanol that people use.\nEthanol fuel.\nEthanol fuel can be used instead of gasoline in cars and other engines. Engines can use pure ethanol or ethanol mixed with gasoline.\nIn Brazil, ethanol fuel made from sugar cane provides 18 percent of the country's fuel for cars. Because of this, Brazil does not have to buy oil from other countries.\nTo do this, Brazil cut down much of the rain forests to grow more sugar cane, which is then fermented into Ethanol.\nMost cars in the U.S. can run on fuels that have of up to 10% ethanol in them. Car makers like Ford, DaimlerChrysler, and GM also make vehicles specifically designed to run on higher ethanol blends. Some of their engines can run on up to 85% ethanol (E85). By mid-2006, there were about six million E85-compatible vehicles on U.S. roads."}
{"id": "21980", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21980", "title": "Ethyl aclohol", "text": ""}
{"id": "21981", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21981", "title": "Grain alcohol", "text": ""}
{"id": "21982", "revid": "7188426", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21982", "title": "Boiling point", "text": "The boiling point of a substance is the temperature at which the substance boils, or enters a state of rapid evaporation. For pure water this is 100\u00b0 Celsius or 212\u00b0 Fahrenheit. This is measured at one atmosphere, that is, the air pressure at sea level\nBoiling points can be changed in several ways. The addition of solutes or other substances usually changes the boiling point. Additionally, changing the pressure on a liquid changes its boiling point. \nThe boiling point of a liquid depends on the pressure of the surrounding air. An increase in air pressure increases the boiling point; a decrease decreases the boiling point. In the low pressure environment at the top of Mt Everest for example, water boils at only 69 \u00b0C. (156.2 \u00b0F).\nIt can also be defined in terms of vapour pressure as the temperature at which vapour pressure of liquid becomes equal to atmospheric pressure\nSugar, salt or other non-volatile solutes in water will usually make the boiling point higher. Alcohol, in contrast, is a volatile chemical that lowers the boiling point of water. Even a large amount dissolved in the water will usually make only small changes in the boiling point."}
{"id": "21986", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21986", "title": "Platonic solid", "text": "A platonic solid is a kind of polyhedron. It has the following characteristics:\nThe platonic solids.\nThe following Platonic solids exist; there are only 5:\nUses.\nThere are a lot more uses for Platonic Solids, but some of the main reasons are:the shapes are often used to make dice, because dice of these shapes can be made fair. 6-sided dice are very common, but the other numbers are commonly used in role-playing games. Such dice are commonly referred to as D followed by the number of faces (d8, d20 etc.).\nThe tetrahedron (4 sided), cube (6 sided), and octahedron (8 sided), are found naturally in crystal structures. The dodecahedron (12 sides) is combinatorially identical to the pyritohedron (in that both have twelve pentagonal faces), which is one of the possible crystal structures of pyrite. However, the pyritohedron is not a regular dodecahedron, but rather has the same symmetry as the cube.\nIn meteorology and climatology, global numerical models of atmospheric flow are of increasing interest which use grids that are based on an icosahedron (20 sides,refined by triangulation) instead of the more commonly used longitude/latitude grid. This has the advantage of better spatial resolution without singularities (i.e. the poles) at the expense of somewhat greater numerical difficulty.\nGeometry of space frames is often based on platonic solids. "}
{"id": "21987", "revid": "7414758", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21987", "title": "Euclidean algorithm", "text": "The Euclidean algorithm is an algorithm. It can be used to find the biggest number that divides two other numbers (the greatest common divisor of two numbers).\nWhat the algorithm looks like in words.\nEuclid solved the problem graphically. He said\nThe algorithm as an enumerated list.\nStart out with two positive integers \"m\" and \"n\".\nThe algorithm in pseudocode.\nNote: This pseudocode uses modular arithmetic instead of subtraction. It does the same thing as above, but gets the answer faster.\nPrecondition: two positive integers \"m\" and \"n\"\nPostcondition: the greatest common integer divisor of \"m\" and \"n\"\nC/C++ source code.\nIterative (Non-recursive):\nRecursive:"}
{"id": "21988", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21988", "title": "Rhino", "text": ""}
{"id": "21991", "revid": "7893942", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21991", "title": "Eukaryote", "text": "An eukaryote is an organism with complex cells, or a single cell with complex structures. In these cells the genetic material is organized into chromosomes in the cell nucleus.\nAnimals, plants, algae and fungi are all eukaryotes. There are also eukaryotes amongst single-celled protists. In contrast, simpler organisms, such as bacteria and archaea, do not have nuclei and other complex cell structures. Such organisms are called prokaryotes.\nThe eukaryotes are often treated as a superkingdom, or domain.\nEukaryotes evolved in the Proterozoic eon. The oldest known probable eukaryote is \"Grypania\", a coiled, unbranched filament up to 30\u00a0mm long. The oldest \"Grypania\" fossils come from an iron mine near Negaunee, Michigan. The fossils were originally dated as 2100 million years ago, but later research showed the date as about 1874 million years ago. \"Grypania\" lasted into the Mesoproterozoic era.\nAnother ancient group is the acritarchs, believed to be the cysts or reproductive stages of algal plankton. They are found 1400 million years ago, in the Mesoproterozoic era.p57\nThe classification of the Eukaryota is under active discussion, and several taxonomies have been proposed. Modern versions disagree about the number of kingdoms. It carrys DNA as well as it is an organism\nStructure.\nEukaryotic cells are usually much bigger than prokaryotes. They can be up to 10 times bigger. Eukaryote cells have many different internal membranes and structures, called organelles. They also have a cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton is made up of microtubules and microfilaments. Those parts are very important in the cell's shape. Eukaryotic DNA is put in bundles called chromosomes, which are separated by a microtubular spindle during cell division. Most eukaryotes have some sort of sexual reproduction through fertilisation, which prokaryotes do not use.\nProkaryotes do not have sexes, but they can pass DNA to other bacteria. Their cell division is asexual. Bacterial conjugation is when bacteria move a genetic element (often a plasmid or transposon) from one to another.\nEukaryotes have sets of linear chromosomes located in the nucleus and the number of chromosomes is usually typical for each species.\nInternal membrane.\nIn eukaryotic cells, there are many things with membranes around them. All of them together are called the endomembrane system. Simple bags, called vesicles or vacuoles, are sometimes made by budding off other membranes, just like how children make bubbles with their toys. Many cells take in food and other things using something called endocytosis. In endocytosis, the membrane closest to the outside bends inwards and then pinches off to make a vesicle. Many other organelles that have membranes probably started off as vesicles.\nThe nucleus is surrounded by two membranes membrane that has holes in it so things can go in and out. The nuclear envelope has things sticking out of it that look like tubes and sheets. These are called the endoplasmic reticulum which is often shortened to ER. The ER is works with moving proteins around and allowing them to mature.\nThe ER has two parts, the rough ER and the smooth ER. The rough ER has ribosomes attached to it. The proteins made by the ribosomes attached to the rough ER go to the inside the rough ER, called the lumen. After that, they usually go into vesicles, which grow and pinch off from the smooth ER. In most eukaryotes, the vesicles with proteins inside fuse with piles of flattened vesicles called the Golgi bodies, where the proteins inside are changed again.\nVesicles are sometimes changed so they can do one thing very well. This is called specialization, or differentiation. For example, lysosomes have enzymes inside them that break down the food the comes from food vacuoles, and peroxisomes have enzymes that break down peroxide, a poison, so it is not poisonous anymore.\nMany protozoa have contractile vacuoles, which are vacuoles that can fuse or pinch off from the outer membrane. Contractile vesicles are often used to get and get rid of unneeded water. Extrusomes shoot out stuff that make predators go away or catch food. In multicellular organisms, hormones are often made in vesicles. In the complicated plants, most of the inside of a plant cell is taken up by a central vacuole. That central vacuole is the main thing that keeps osmotic pressure so the cell can hold its shape.\nOrigin.\nBecause the cell organelles of eukaryotes have different (polyphyletic) origins, the question arises as to whether the group is a unified clade or not. It is certain that the protists are not. Cell organelles are specialised units which carry out well-defined functions, like mitochondria and plastids. It is fairly clear now that all or most of these organelles have their origin in once-independent prokaryotes (bacteria or archaea), and that the eukaryote cell is a 'community of micro-organisms' working together in 'a marriage of convenience'. The first such events took place between ancient bacteria to produce the double-membrane class known as gram-negative bacteria. Since the gram-negative bacteria include the cyanobacteria, this was the first of several such events in the history of the eukaryotes.\nRole of the Archaea.\nRecent research shows that \"the known repertoire of \u2018eukaryote-specific\u2019 proteins in Archaea [indicate] that the archaeal host cell already contained many key components that govern eukaryotic cellular complexity\".\nTaxonomy.\n\"Protista\" is a group of different single-celled organisms. More accurate taxonomies have been proposed, but scientists are still discussing them. For this reason, Protista is still useful for talking about these organisms. One modern scheme for the classification of the Eukarya is as follows:\nHowever, in 2005, doubts were expressed as to whether some of these supergroups were monophyletic, particularly the Chromalveolata, and a review in 2006 noted the lack of evidence for several of the supposed six supergroups.\nThe Eukarya may only be unified in the sense that the cells are a community derived from bacteria and archaea; opinions vary. Like the Protista, the Eukarya may be a polyphyletic assembly, though a useful one. However, as mentioned above, all branches of the Eukarya have sexual reproduction. That, and the general organisation of the nucleus, are the defining features. These two points are the main evidence for monophyletic origin."}
{"id": "21992", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21992", "title": "Unicellular organism", "text": "Unicellular organisms are organisms that have one cell. They are divided into two quite different types, from different classification kingdoms. \nThe differences between the prokaryota and eukaryota are significant. Eukaryotes possess a nucleus and various subcellular organs called organelles, and prokaryotes do not.\nObservations.\nAlmost all unicellular organisms are microorganisms but you can observe eukaryotes and many prokaryotes by using a compound microscope. Bacteria just appear as dark dots. To gather unicellular organisms for observation, one can place a cover slip on the surface of pond water, and leave it overnight. By the next morning, numerous unicellular organisms will have grown entire colonies on the bottom of the slip. They multiply fast: colonies can double their size in between 30 minutes and a few hours.\nUnicellular organisms can be found everywhere. The oldest forms of life existed 3.8 billion years ago, if not longer. They pursue a variety of strategies for survival: photosynthesis (cyanobacteria), chemotrophy (many archaea), and heterotrophy (amoeba). Some unicellular organisms have flagella, little tails they use for locomotion, or lobopods, extensions of the cellular skeleton (cytoskeleton), which appear as bloblike arms. The flagella of our unicellular ancestors occurs all the way up into the animals, where it makes an appearance as flagellated sperm.\nOf all the six eukaryote supergroups, four are exclusively composed of unicellular organisms. Unicellular organisms vary in size, with the smallest bacteria measuring only a third of a micron (300 nanometers) across, ranging up to the titanic plasmodial slime molds, which can grow to 20\u00a0cm (8\u00a0in) across. The largest unicellular organisms may have millions of nuclei scattered throughout the cellular envelope. To observe some of the smallest unicellular organisms requires an electron microscope, while the very largest can be seen with a microscope or anything that enhances images."}
{"id": "21993", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21993", "title": "Unicellular", "text": ""}
{"id": "21995", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21995", "title": "Multicellular organism", "text": "Multi-cellular organisms are organisms with more than one cell. This is the case for animals, plants and most fungi. In such organisms, cells are usually specialised. All the cells with the same function work together. Such a group of cells is then called a tissue. \nMulti-cellular organisms have a set of cells that specialize in reproduction. Reproduction in such organisms is usually sexual. The sex cells are either sperm or ovum (also named \"egg\") cells. If they are sperm cells, the organism is male, if they are egg cells it is female. If both are present, the organism is a hermaphrodite.\nEvolutionary history.\nWe know, from their cell structure, that multicellularity has evolved independently many times in Earth history, for example in plants and animals.\nThe earliest forms of life in the fossil record are cyanobacteria from the Archaean era at 3.5 billion years ago. They grew as single cells but lived in colonies as stromatolites. \nThe first multicellular fossils have been found in 2.1 billion years old Palaeoproterozoic rocks from the Gabon in Africa. These are eukaryotic cells which live colonially. The fossils are visible to the naked eye, and hence much larger than bacteria. The authors comment that one advantage of multicellularity is larger size, and that an adequate level of oxygen is required to support this kind of life. \nConsequences of multicellularity.\nTo reproduce, multicellular organisms must solve the problem of regenerating a whole organism from germ cells (i.e. sperm and egg cells), an issue that is studied in developmental biology. \nMulticellular organisms, especially long-living animals, also face the challenge of cancer, which occurs when cells fail to regulate their growth within the normal program of development."}
{"id": "21996", "revid": "7858125", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21996", "title": "Hexahedron", "text": "A hexahedron (plural: hexahedra) is any polyhedron with six faces. A cube, for example, is a regular hexahedron with all its faces square, and three squares around each vertex.\nThere are seven topologically distinct \"convex\" hexahedra, one of which exists in two mirror image forms. (Two polyhedra are \"topologically distinct\" if they have intrinsically different arrangements of faces and vertices, such that it is impossible to distort one into the other simply by changing the lengths of edges or the angles between edges or faces.)\nThere are three further topologically distinct hexahedra that can only be realised as \"concave\" figures:"}
{"id": "22000", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22000", "title": "Kazan State University", "text": "Kazan (Volga region) Federal University (, \"Kazanskiy (Privolzhskiy) federalnyy universitet\"; ) is a university in Kazan, Tatarstan, Russia. It was founded in 1804. The famous Russian mathematician Lobachevsky was its headmaster from 1827 till 1846. The post is now being held by Myakzyum Salakhov (M\u00e4\u011fz\u00fcm S\u00e4l\u00e4xev).\nKazan University is also known as \"the birthplace of organic chemistry\" because of the works of Aleksandr Butlerov, Vladimir Markovnikov, Aleksandr Arbuzov, and others."}
{"id": "22002", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22002", "title": "New World", "text": "The New World is a name used for the Western Hemisphere. It specifically refers to the Americas. It can also refer to certain Atlantic and Pacific islands (like Bermuda) and sometimes Oceania, (Australasia). The name started in the early 16th century, shortly after America was colonized. The people of the European Middle Ages thought the world was only Europe, Asia, and Africa. These continents are called the Old World. The Americas were also referred to as the \"fourth part of the world\".\nThe continent (North and South America) was named America after Amerigo Vespucci.\nOceania, which was colonized some centuries later, is referred to as \"The Newest World\"."}
{"id": "22008", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22008", "title": "Kyrgyz republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "22009", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22009", "title": "Kirghizia", "text": ""}
{"id": "22016", "revid": "7780247", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22016", "title": "Rabbit", "text": "Rabbits are mammals of the order Lagomorpha. There are about fifty different species of rabbits and hares. The order Lagomorpha is made of rabbits, pikas and hares. Rabbits can be found in many parts of the world. They live in families and eat vegetables and hay. In the wild, rabbits live in burrows, that they dig themselves. A group of rabbits living together in a burrow is called a warren. Rabbits are famous for hopping and eating carrots. \nA male rabbit is called a buck, and a female is called a doe. A baby rabbit is called a kit, which is short for kitten. Rabbits have a gestation period of around 31 days. The female can have up to 12-13 kits, very rarely litters as big as 18 and as small as one. When the doe gives birth her babies are collectively referred to as a litter. Some people have rabbits as pets. Rabbits are also raised for their meat. Rabbits are of a different biological classification than hares. \nSince rabbits are prey animals, they are careful in open spaces. If they sense danger, they freeze and watch. Rabbit vision has a very wide field, including overhead scanning. Their enemies are foxes and dogs; also bears, raccoons, minks, weasels and snakes. Birds of prey sometimes take rabbits. People are also known to shoot rabbits, because they eat crops. Their escape method is to run for their burrow, where they are usually safe.\nRabbits have a complex social structure and, like dogs, they have a hierarchy. Rabbit ears probably have several functions. The main function is to give warning of predators, but they may be used for signalling, and temperature regulation.\nRabbits as pets.\nIn the wild, rabbits have plenty to keep them occupied, from foraging to reproduction to territorial defense. Captive rabbits, on the other hand, often lack stimulation. This can lead to behavioral problems and poor health. The expected lifespan of a rabbit in the wild is about three years."}
{"id": "22031", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22031", "title": "Roundworm", "text": ""}
{"id": "22032", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22032", "title": "Louis Pasteur", "text": "Louis Pasteur (December 27, 1822 \u2013 September 28, 1895) was a French microbiologist and chemist.\nHe and his wife, Marie, are best known for their experiments supporting the germ theory of disease, and he is also known for his vaccinations, most notably the first vaccine against rabies. \nCareer.\nHe made many discoveries in the field of chemistry, including the asymmetry (different shapes) of crystals. He is also well known for his way of keeping milk and wine from going sour for longer periods of time. That process is called pasteurization. It is when the milk and or wine is put under about 161 Fahrenheit (72 Celsius) for fifteen seconds \nPasteur's later work on diseases included work on chicken cholera. During this work, Pasteur noticed how a culture of the responsible bacteria had spoiled, and it failed to induce the disease in some chickens, which he was infecting, with the disease.\nPersonal life.\nLouis Pasteur was born on December 27, 1822 in Dole in the Jura region of France, into the family of a poor tanner. Louis grew up in the town of Arbois. He gained degrees in Letters and in Mathematical Sciences before entering the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, an elite college. \nAfter serving briefly as professor of physics at Dijon Lyc\u00e9e in 1848, he became professor of chemistry at the University of Strasbourg, where he met and courted Marie Laurent, daughter of the university's rector, in 1849.\nLouis Pasteur and Marie were married on May 29, 1849, and together had five children. Only two survived to adulthood; his other three children had died of typhoid fever. These personal tragedies inspired Pasteur to try to find cures for diseases, such as typhoid.\nDeath.\nIn 1895 at Marnes-la-Coquette, a commune in Paris, Pasteur died after several strokes."}
{"id": "22034", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22034", "title": "Rabbits", "text": ""}
{"id": "22035", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22035", "title": "Bunnies", "text": ""}
{"id": "22036", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22036", "title": "Akrotiri and Dhekelia", "text": "Akrotiri and Dhekelia are two British overseas territories that borders the Republic of Cyprus and Northern Cyprus. They are used as military bases by the United Kingdom. The bases were kept by the UK after Cyprus changed from being a colony in the British Empire, to being an independent republic. The United Kingdom kept them because of the important location of Cyprus in the Mediterranean Sea."}
{"id": "22037", "revid": "1041253", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22037", "title": "Transcontinental country", "text": "A transcontinental country is a nation that is in more than one continent. Examples:\nAfrica and Asia\nAsia and Europe\nMost of the other examples are contentious, based on the possession of small islands in another region. For example, Spain controlling the Canary Islands which is geologically located in Africa. A few are undoubtedly intercontinental:\nAsia and Oceania\nAmerica and Oceania\nAmerica, Oceania and Antarctica\nOceania and Antarctica\nEurope, Africa, and America\n\u2022 France, because R\u00e9union, Mayotte, Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French Guiana are regions of France"}
{"id": "22038", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22038", "title": "Sea stars", "text": ""}
{"id": "22039", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22039", "title": "Starfishes", "text": ""}
{"id": "22042", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22042", "title": "Vladimir Ilich Lenin", "text": ""}
{"id": "22043", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22043", "title": "Vladimir Ulyanov", "text": ""}
{"id": "22044", "revid": "7696109", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22044", "title": "Kur\u00f3w", "text": "Kur\u00f3w is a village in south-eastern Poland, near Pu\u0142awy and Lublin, on the Kur\u00f3wka River. It is the main village of a gmina within the Lublin Voivodship and has 2826 people living there (as of 2010). The village was built before 1185 and made bigger between 1431 and 1442 with city rights based on the Magdeburg Law. The former President of Poland, Wojciech Jaruzelski was born in Kur\u00f3w in 1923."}
{"id": "22045", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22045", "title": "Scorpion", "text": "Scorpions are eight legged venomous arachnids. They have a long body with an extended tail with a sting. The average adult scorpion is about 3\u00a0inches in length. The longest scorpion is the African scorpion, which can be 9\u00a0inches long. There are about 1,750 species of scorpions worldwide.\nThe evolutionary history of scorpions goes back to the Silurian, 430 million years ago. They have adapted to a wide range of environments, and live on all continents except Antarctica. There are 13 living families. Only about 25 species have venom which can kill a human being.\nAnatomy.\nThey have eight legs and a pair of grasping pedipalps (like claws). The tail is narrow, with segments. It usually has a forward curve over the back, ending with a venomous stinger.\nTheir body is in three parts. The front section is the \"cephalothorax\"; the abdomen is called the \"mesosoma\", and the tail is the \"metasoma\". The body is covered by an exoskeleton which gives them good protection.\nSurvival in the desert.\nScorpions have many ways to survive in the desert. They can slow down their metabolism. This allows them to survive on as little as one insect per year. This ability also allows them to shelter from the sun and heat for extended periods of time, using only little amounts of oxygen. \nMany people also believe that their claws, or pincers, were once front legs that have turned into what they now are by going through evolution. Nevertheless, the scorpions' claws play a crucial part in their hunting and mating rituals.\nScorpions also possess a special, feather-like pair of organs, called pectines that they use to sense even the smallest of movements around them. This allows them to effectively track down and hunt their prey, either above or below the surface. This also warns them of possible dangers, such as other bigger hunters.\nThe scorpion\u2019s most feared and recognized feature is its sting. The sting contains a neurotoxin, which the scorpion uses to paralyze the victim, so it would be easier to kill and eat. They also stay hidden under rocks and that makes their body temperature cool.\nBreeding cycle.\nThe mating ritual of scorpions begins when the male and female connect claws. After this they verify that the other scorpion is of the same species, and is the opposite gender. After this, the male leads the female around until it finds a suitable spot to deposit its spermatophore. Once the male has found a suitable spot, he guides the female over it, where it enters her and fertilizes her. The mating ritual can take anywhere between 1 and 26 hours, depending on the male\u2019s ability to find a suitable spot. Only a scorpion that has reached maturity may go through the mating ritual. A scorpion reaches maturity after it has gone through 5 to 7 moults."}
{"id": "22055", "revid": "445729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22055", "title": "1216", "text": "1216 was a leap year starting on a Friday in the Julian calendar."}
{"id": "22056", "revid": "7767539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22056", "title": "John Schlesinger", "text": "John Richard Schlesinger, CBE (16 February 1926 \u2013 25 July 2003) was a British movie director. He was born into a Jewish family in London. He was openly gay. He died of a stroke in Palm Springs, California, United States.\nSchlesinger's acting career began in the 1950s. He started to direct in 1956. By the 1960s he was not acting so he could just direct. His documentary \"Terminus\" (1961), got a Venice Film Festival Gold Lion and a British Academy Award. \"A Kind of Loving\" won the Golden Bear award at the 12th Berlin International Film Festival in 1962. Schlesinger's movie, \"Midnight Cowboy\" (1969), made in the United States, was internationally successful. A story of two hustlers living on the fringe in the bad side of New York City, it was Schlesinger's first movie shot in the U.S. It won Oscars for Best Director and Best Picture. In 1996 he received the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, a lifetime achievement award."}
{"id": "22057", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22057", "title": "Landj\u00e4ger", "text": "Landj\u00e4ger (or Landjaeger) is a type of German sausage. The name stands for \"hunter's sausage\". It is smoked, so it does not need refrigeration. Usually, some of the water has also been taken out (they are dehydrated)."}
{"id": "22058", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22058", "title": "Ellice Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "22059", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22059", "title": "Gilbert and Ellice Islands", "text": "The Gilbert and Ellice Islands were a British protectorate from 1892 and colony from 1916. They are formed from two groups of islands in the Pacific Ocean. On 1 January 1976 the islands were split into two different colonies that became independent states. The Gilbert Islands have been the biggest part of the nation of Kiribati since 1979, and the Ellice Islands became Tuvalu in 1978."}
{"id": "22060", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22060", "title": "Casablanca", "text": "Casablanca (classical Arabic name: \u0627\u0644\u062f\u0627\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0628\u064a\u0636\u0627\u0621, \"the white house\"; Spanish:Casablanca, \"whitehouse\") is a city in western Morocco, on the Atlantic Ocean. \nWith 2.95 million people (September 2004 census), Casablanca is Morocco's biggest city.\nCasablanca has a Mediterranean Climate with hot dry summers and wet rainy winters."}
{"id": "22061", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22061", "title": "Casablanca, Morocco", "text": ""}
{"id": "22076", "revid": "844779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22076", "title": "Flatulence", "text": "Flatulence or farting is when intestinal gas leaves the anus. This often happens with a sound that can be embarrassing to some people, but in some cultures it is treated like humor. The word flatuence comes from the Latin word \"flatus\", which means blowing or breath, but people today usually call it farting.\nIn mammals like humans, the gases come from two sources: swallowed air (for example, while eating, talking or drinking) and gases naturally created by bacteria in the body during digestion. Of the gases that come out during flatuence, most of it is nitrogen (which has the chemical formula N2 and makes up between 20% to 90% of all the gases), followed by hydrogen (H), carbon dioxide (CO2), oxygen (O2) and methane (CH4)."}
{"id": "22078", "revid": "642202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22078", "title": "Computability theory", "text": "Computability theory is part of computer science. Scientists want to know what can be computed, and what can not. \nThere is a model of a computer that is used for this. It is called the Turing machine. A Turing machine basically is a special typewriter with an endless ribbon. The machine is named after the mathematician Alan Turing.\nA problem is \"computable\" if it can be expressed in such a way that a Turing machine can solve it. \nOne of the best known examples is the Halting problem. The task is to write a program which says for all programs whether they will finally stop. This is impossible to decide. Mathematicians say the problem is undecidable."}
{"id": "22079", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22079", "title": "Batman (city)", "text": "Batman is a city in southeast Turkey. It is the capital (city) of the province with the same name. In 2010, 325,000 people lived there. There are many Kurds in that area. The area has much oil and gas.\nThere is a railway track at Kurtalan, near this city. The track runs all the way to Istanbul. There is also an airport near Batman. The name is short for the Bati Raman mountains."}
{"id": "22081", "revid": "24306", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22081", "title": "Typewriter", "text": "A\u00a0typewriter is a machine that is for typing on a piece of paper instead of writing by hand. It has keys for typing letters, numerals, and symbols one at a time. Typewriters were created in 1829. Typewriters were originally invented to make writing faster and printing. The earliest typing was done on stone, clay, or metal sheets by inscribing them. \nA typewriter does not have computer memory. As with writing with a pen, it is difficult to correct mistakes. One advantage is that many of them are not electrical, so you do not need to plug them in. Hackers cannot see what you have typed. On many typewriters, a separate type element (called a typebar) corresponds to each key. The first commercial typewriters were introduced in 1874. They did not become common in offices until after the mid-1880s. \nTypewriters quickly became a necessary tool for almost all writing other than personal handwritten letters. They were used a lot by professional writers, in offices, and for business correspondence in private homes. Typewriters were common in most offices up to the 1980s. After that, computers often replaced them. Nevertheless, typewriters are still common in some parts of the world. They are needed for a few specific applications, and they are popular in certain subcultures. Early typewriters, and later cheap ones, were \"manual\" typewriters. This means they were powered completely by the user. After the mid-20th century, electric typewriters with a motor became most common. "}
{"id": "22082", "revid": "25400", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22082", "title": "Nocturnal animals", "text": "Nocturnal (Latin: \"nox\" - night, darkness) animals are animals that are mainly active during the night. They hunt or feed during the night, and sleep during the day. Diurnal animals do it the other way around.\nCrepuscular animals are mostly active near dawn, dusk, and sometimes when the full moon throws light. Domestic cats hunt mice and voles mostly at this time.\nCathemeral animals are equally likely to be awake and active at any time of day or night. \nMany nocturnal animals have good night vision. Their large eyes may be highly reflective when a bright light flashes on them. Owls and bats are typical nocturnal predators. More specifically, they have a larger cornea relative to their eye size than diurnal creatures. This increases their visual sensitivity in low-light conditions."}
{"id": "22085", "revid": "10890", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22085", "title": "Fart", "text": ""}
{"id": "22087", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22087", "title": "Censorship", "text": "Censorship is when an authority (such as a government or religion) cuts out or suppresses communication.\nThis has been done widely. All countries, religions and societies have their limits as to what can be said, or written or communication by art or nowadays by computer.\nCertain facts are changed or removed on purpose. This may be done because it is considered wrong, harmful, sensitive, or inconvenient to the government or other authority. This can be done for different reasons.\nA censor is a person whose job is to look at all types of media and remove material. There are many reasons to censor something, like protecting military secrets, stopping immoral or anti-religious works, or keeping political power. Censorship is almost always used as an insult, and there is much debate over what censorship is and when it is okay.\nWhen there is freedom of speech and freedom of the press, most information can published. However, even in developed countries with much freedom of the press, there are some things that cannot be published. For example, journalists are usually not allowed to publish many secrets about the military, like where troops will be sent on a mission. Pornography is censored in some countries because it is seen as not moral. For these reasons, the government might arrest anyone who publishes it. \nReasons.\nMost often things are censored for one or more of the following reasons:\nDebate.\nThere is much debate about when censorship should be allowed. For example, U.S. President Richard Nixon censored the New York Times when they tried to publish articles about the Pentagon Papers, a group of classified military documents that showed that Nixon and the military lied about the Vietnam War. The Supreme Court in New York Times Co v. United States overturned the censorship, saying that Nixon had not shown it would be dangerous to the military, just embarrassing. In other countries, journalists and bloggers (who are usually not seen as journalists) are sometimes arrested for saying bad things about the government. In Egypt, Kareem Amer was famously arrested for insulting Islam and calling the president of Egypt, Hosni Mubarak, a dictator. \nNon-governmental censorship.\nGovernments are not the only ones who censor information. For example, when the history department at Middlebury College did not allow professors to accept Wikipedia as a source in papers, some said it was censorship. This was because the department was telling professors (who usually have academic freedom) what works they should or should not accept. Sometimes, a group or a website will not allow some facts, articles, and pictures that they do not think should be seen. There is much debate over the difference between censorship and editing, that is, deciding what should or should not be published.\nCensorship of knowledge.\nSometimes there is censorship of knowledge because it is believed that the average person can be harmed by access to it.\nSlate Magazine wrote that in the 18th century the French king\u2019s council stopped the distribution of Encyclop\u00e9die because it was \u201cdestroying royal authority and encouraging a spirit of independence and revolt,\u201d\nThe Chinese government has blocked the Chinese-language Wikipedia since June 2015.\nOn July 16, 2019 the National Post ran an article about a woman who was banned fromTwitter. Lindsay Shepherd who is described as a Free speech advocate claimed that twitter has been too eager to censor right-wing public figures. Shepherd was a teaching assistant at Wilfrid Laurier University."}
{"id": "22088", "revid": "6988375", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22088", "title": "Czestochowa", "text": "Cz\u0119stochowa is a city in south Poland on the Warta River. It has 248,894 residents. It has been in the Silesian Voivodeship (administrative division) since 1999, and was once the capital of Cz\u0119stochowa Voivodship (1975-1998).\nThe town is known for the famous monastery of Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery, which is the home of the Black Madonna painting, a shrine of the Virgin Mary. Every year, thousands of people from all over the world come to Cz\u0119stochowa to see it. \nCity name.\nThe name Cz\u0119stochowa means Cz\u0119stoch's place, and comes from the name of a person, Cz\u0119stoch. It is mentioned in medieval documents also as Cz\u0119stobor and Cz\u0119stomir. Cz\u0119stochowa is also known as Czestochowa, Czenstochov, and Chenstochov.\nTourism.\nCurrently, the city is one of the main tourist attractions in the area. It attracts hundreds of thousands of visitors every year.\nThe Black Madonna of Cz\u0119stochowa, kept at the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery, is a very popular attraction."}
{"id": "22090", "revid": "11594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22090", "title": "Vovoidship", "text": ""}
{"id": "22091", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22091", "title": "Voivodeships of Poland", "text": "A Voivodeship is one of 16 different divisions of land in Poland. The word comes from the Polish \"wojewoda\" meaning a governor. "}
{"id": "22092", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22092", "title": "Crepuscular", "text": ""}
{"id": "22093", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22093", "title": "Nocturnal animal", "text": ""}
{"id": "22095", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22095", "title": "50s", "text": "\"This is an article about the years 50 AD to 59 AD. Sometimes, \"the 50s\" is used for the 1950s\"."}
{"id": "22096", "revid": "7864597", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22096", "title": "Volleyball", "text": "Volleyball is a team sport. The teams are separated by a large net. It has six players on each side of the net. Each team is allowed twelve substitution players. The game starts when the captain from each team decides which side of the court they will play on, by the toss of a coin, which also determines who will serve (hit) the ball first. The point of the game is to keep the ball in the air. The ball can be played with any part of the body, with a maximum of three strokes a team. If at any point the ball hits the floor, the side that the ball landed on it is a point for the other team.\nHistory.\nIn 1895, William G. Morgan invented a new game called \"Mintonette\". However, when an observer named Alfred Halstead saw the game being played, he noticed the volleying action used to get the ball over the net, so he decided to change the name to \"volleyball\".\nMorgan wanted to create a skilled activity, which required more players, less space, and less exertion than basketball. The first net was a \u201crope\u201d and the first ball was a basketball air bladder. Until 1960, men and women played with different rules. Now the rules are the same except for the height of the net, the men\u2019s net is higher.\nA player cannot hit the ball twice. A point is gained when a team plays the ball in the opposition's court and the ball is not defended, therefore it lands within the court. The ball must be served (hit) from outside the court, otherwise, it will be regarded as a foul. The game is played in sets of 25 points (sometimes 21). The team that reaches 25 (or 21) points first, wins the set. Each game consists of 3-5 sets (or the first one to 3 in middle school). The fifth set is played to 15 points.\nA player usually wears knee pads to protect their knees from becoming bruised during dives for the \"volleyball\". In order to win the game, the winners must be ahead by 2 points or the game goes on until you win by 2 points.\nThe sports governing body is the (FIVB). Digging is the ability to prevent the ball from touching one's court after a spike or attack, particularly a ball that is nearly touching the ground. Usually, the player is diving (throwing themselves towards the ground) to be the barrier to block the ball from hitting the court. In many aspects, this skill is similar to passing, or bumping: overhand dig and bump are also used to distinguish between defensive actions taken with fingertips or with joined arms.\nSome specific techniques are more common in digging than in passing. A player may sometimes perform a \"dive\", i.e., throw his or her body in the air with a forward movement in an attempt to save the ball, and land on his or her chest. When the player also slides his or her hand under a ball that is almost touching the court, this is called a \"pancake\". The pancake is frequently used in indoor volleyball. Besides being one of the best-known sports in the world, and being a favourite to millions of people, it is in the Olympics.\nPositions.\nThe positions in volleyball are separated into 6 areas, the first being Position 1 which is the back right side on the side that you are. Position 2 is on the right side of the court closest to the net, Position 3 is in the middle of the front part of the court right beside the net, Position 4 is on the left side of the court right beside the net, Position 5 is in the back left side of the court, and Position 6 is in the middle of the back of the court.\nCourt.\nThe court is . A net is stretched tightly in the middle. The height of the net is for middle and high schools and college women, 7,11 feet (2.43 m) for college men.\nThe game.\nThe objective of the game is to legally return the ball over the net in such a manner that the opponent\u2019s team cannot make a legal return. The main causes of illegal plays are: holding, carrying, or lifting with the palm of the hands, four touches on one side, and two consecutive touches by one player. A regulation game is played with six players on the court. They are to rotate to serve in a clockwise direction when facing the net. The server will come from the right front position, serve, then play the right back position.\nScoring.\nRally scoring is used in volleyball, which means a point will be awarded to one of the two teams when a rally ends or a mistake is made. A regulation game is played to 25 points and the winners must be ahead by 2 points. A middle and high school game is played best out of three games. If the games are tied at 1-1, the 3rd game is played to 15 points and the winners must be ahead by 2 points.\nSkills.\nServing: may be underhand or overhand. If the serve touches the net and goes to the opponent\u2019s side, it must be played. The server is not allowed to step on or over the end line when serving. In class, the server must say the score before serving.\nFloat: Similar to a knuckle ball in baseball, the server stands flat footed and contacts the ball with a stiff wrist and does not swing through after contact. This causes no spin to be on the ball, allowing it to catch any air current and causes the ball to change directional course throughout the whole air course.\nTop Spin: This serve is executed by snapping hard on the ball during contact. This puts a forward spin on the ball, which causes it to drop faster than a float.\nJump Serve: A jump serve is used to assist the server get more height. By jumping they have a better angle to put the ball down into the court, and are less likely to be underneath the ball. This can be a float or topspin ball depending on the contact, arm swing, and approach.\nPass or Bump (underarm pass): This is a pass used when the ball approaches a player below their shoulders. You are to hold your fingers together, elbows straight, and contact the ball with the forearms with shoulders facing the net on impact. Defined as a dig when passing a hard driven hit. Also pancaking is a form of passing. This is when the player has sprawled out to the floor in a last hope type of decision for the ball to land on their hand and it pop straight up.\nSet or volley: (overhead pass) direct the ball to a place specifically. Hands high, flex wrist, contact the ball with the finger pads, and elbows bent. Use your legs and arms to project the ball into the air.\nHit: A hard hit ball from a height above the net, straight to the opponent\u2019s side. Contact the ball with the cupped fingers and a long arm swing.\nBlock: (defensive hit) Two hands above the head, jumping with arms reaching for a ball that has been spiked. A block is used to prevent a volley from crossing the net. it usually hits the ball straight down or up!\nDig: Digging is the ability to prevent the ball from touching one's court after a spike or attack, particularly a ball that is nearly touching the ground.\nTerminology.\nServe: to put the ball into play from the end line.\nSide out: the team that served made a mistake, ball now goes to the opponent\u2019s for service.\nSet: overhead pass that allows a player to spike\nBump: an underhand pass performed when a ball is below the shoulders\nSpike: a hard driven ball aimed at the opponents.\nBlock: a defensive play to prevent the ball from crossing the net.\nDouble: Contacting the ball twice typically while settings\nKill: Any hit, rollshot, or tip that automatically results in a point."}
{"id": "22097", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22097", "title": "Twilight", "text": "Twilight means either dawn (in the morning) or dusk (in the evening).\nIn the morning, dawn is when it is not dark any more, and the light of the sun is just starting to appear, before sunrise. In the evening, it is the other way around and that phenomenon is called dusk. At sunset, the sun disappears, and darkness is settling in. Light fades away.\nThe following have been defined:\nFor all these definitions, the horizon is at sea level."}
{"id": "22098", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22098", "title": "Dusk", "text": ""}
{"id": "22099", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22099", "title": "Dawn", "text": ""}
{"id": "22100", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22100", "title": "Great Depression", "text": "The Great Depression was the great economic crisis that started after the U.S. stock market crash in 1929. The prices on the Wall Street stock market fell a lot from October 24 to October 29, 1929. Many people lost their jobs. By 1932, 25\u201330% of people lost their jobs. They became homeless and poor. This ended the wealth of the Roaring Twenties. Many people think that the Great Depression started on Tuesday, October 29, but economists think Black Tuesday was just one of the causes.\nFrom 1929 to 1932, the depression worsened. Many suspect that increased taxes on American citizens and the increased tariffs (taxes on countries which trade with the United States) worsened it. Economist Milton Friedman said that the Great Depression was worsened because the Federal Reserve printed out less money than usual.\nWhen the Great Depression started, Herbert Hoover was the president of the United States, and as a result, he was blamed for it. People voted for a new president in 1932. His name was Franklin D. Roosevelt. Roosevelt got the government to pass many new laws and programs to help people who were hurt by the Great Depression. These programs were called the New Deal.\nOne of these programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps, or CCC. The CCC put many young men to work in the outdoors. The men were paid thirty dollars a month, of which twenty five dollars was sent home to support their families, to work, and they got free food and shelter. Another program was called Social Security. Social Security gave old people a small income so they had money for things they needed. The Great Depression was really bad, but with everyone's help, it would get better. Between 1939 and 1944, more people had jobs again because of World War II, and the Great Depression came to an end.\nBackground.\nThe Great Depression followed a decade of rapid economic growth and urbanization. After the Wall Street Crash of 1929, business declined as it had after previous stock market crashes. However, people still had hope. John D. Rockefeller said that \"These are days when many are discouraged. In the 93 years of my life, depressions have come and gone. Prosperity (wealth) has always returned (come back) and will again.\" But soon the bad effects of the depression grew worse and worse. More people lost jobs, money, and homes. There were reports that in Germany and the United States, there were great hunger, disease, and even starvation. Nations used protectionism more than in recent decades. This diminished international trade.\nThe Dust Bowl.\nFarmers were usually safe from the severe effects of previous depressions because they could at least feed themselves. During the Great Depression, the Great Plains were also hit hard with a drought and dust storms. This was called the Dust Bowl.\nYears of overgrazing combined with drought caused the grass to disappear. With topsoil exposed, high winds picked up the loose dirt and carried it over long distances. The dust storms destroyed crops, leaving farmers without food or something to sell.\nSmall farmers were hit especially hard. Even before the dust storms hit, the invention of the tractor drastically cut the need for manpower on farms. These small farmers were usually already in debt, borrowing money for seed and paying it back when their crops came in. When the dust storms damaged the crops, not only could the small farmer not feed himself and his family, he could not pay back his debt. Banks would then foreclose on the mortgage and the farmer's family would be homeless, unemployed and poor."}
{"id": "22103", "revid": "445729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22103", "title": "1291", "text": ""}
{"id": "22104", "revid": "11132", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22104", "title": "Saigon", "text": ""}
{"id": "22105", "revid": "793", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22105", "title": "Principality of Monaco", "text": ""}
{"id": "22106", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22106", "title": "Delhi", "text": "Delhi (; \"Dill\u012b\"; \"Dill\u012b\"; \"D\u0113hl\u012b\"), officially the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT), is a territory in India. It includes the country's capital New Delhi. It covers an area of . It is bigger than the Faroe Islands but smaller than Guadeloupe. Delhi is a part of the National Capital Region, which has 12.5 million residents. The governance of Delhi is like that of a state in India. It has its own legislature, high court and a council of executive ministers.\nDelhi is on the banks of the Yamuna River. Historians have evidence that people have been living in this region since at least the 6th century BC. People also believe that the legendary city of Indraprastha was here. This city has many remains and monuments of historic importance.\nThe India Gate is a war memorial in Delhi. Following the Bangladesh Liberation war in 1972, a structure consisting of a black marble plinth with a reversed rifle, capped by a war helmet and bounded by four eternal flames, was built beneath the archway. This structure, called Amar Jawan Jyoti (Flame of the Immortal Soldier), has since 1971 served as India's tomb of the unknown soldier"}
{"id": "22107", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22107", "title": "European Central Bank", "text": "The European Central Bank (ECB) is the central bank for the euro and administers monetary policy of the eurozone, which consists of 19 EU member states and is one of the largest currency areas in the world. It is one of the world's most important central banks and is one of the seven institutions of the European Union (EU) listed in the Treaty on European Union (TEU). The capital stock of the bank is owned by the central banks of all 28 EU member states. The Treaty of Amsterdam established the bank in 1998, and it is headquartered in Frankfurt, Germany. the President of the ECB is Mario Draghi, former governor of the Bank of Italy, former member of the World Bank, and former managing director of the Goldman Sachs international division (2002\u20132005). The bank primarily occupied the Eurotower prior to, and during, the construction of the new headquarters.\nThe primary objective of the ECB, mandated in Article 2 of the Statute of the ECB, is to maintain price stability within the Eurozone. Its basic tasks, set out in Article 3 of the Statute, are to set and implement the monetary policy for the Eurozone, to conduct foreign exchange operations, to take care of the foreign reserves of the European System of Central Banks and operation of the financial market infrastructure under the TARGET2 payments system and the technical platform (currently being developed) for settlement of securities in Europe (TARGET2 Securities). The ECB has, under Article 16 of its Statute, the exclusive right to authorise the issuance of euro banknotes. Member states can issue euro coins, but the amount must be authorised by the ECB beforehand.\nThe ECB is governed by European law directly, but its set-up resembles that of a corporation in the sense that the ECB has shareholders and stock capital. Its capital is \u20ac11 billion held by the national central banks of the member states as shareholders. The initial capital allocation key was determined in 1998 on the basis of the states' population and GDP, but the capital key has been adjusted. Shares in the ECB are not transferable and cannot be used as collateral.\nThe European Central Bank is the main bank of the European Union. The European Central Bank is in Frankfurt am Main. The main goal of the European Central Bank is to maintain price stability, in other words make sure inflation is below 2%. This is done by e.g. controlling the interest rates. It is also the only bank allowed to issue euro banknotes (\u20ac), used by 16 of the 28 member states of the European Union (EU).\nPresidents:"}
{"id": "22108", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22108", "title": "Plants", "text": ""}
{"id": "22109", "revid": "7882872", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22109", "title": "Friendship", "text": "Friendship means familiar and liking of each other's mind. \nPeople who are friends talk to each other and spend time together. They trust one another and also help each other when they are in trouble or are hurt. Friends are people that can be looked up to and trusted. Usually, friends have similar interests. A friend is one who admires a person's skill and helps or encourages them to make the right choices and do not get into any trouble at all.\nThe strength of the bond of friendship between two people can vary. If the bond is very strong, they are called best friends. This can usually be achieved by possessing the elements of friendship, by being kind, generous, loyal, honest, and by having fun. With these qualities, you can truly enjoy the bliss of friendship. \nThere are expectations, demands, and complaints in friendship too. If friends don't match your expectations, it does not mean you will break the friendship. It is all about understanding, realizing, and helping whenever possible. \nFriendship is both good and necessary. Man cannot live all alone. He is a social being. He needs someone to share his joys and sorrows. Generally, it is only people of similar age, character, and background, mentality, etc., who can understand him and his problems. Friends are needed for support and for sharing.\nThere are many different types of friendships. Most people find friends at a very young age however it is harder for others. Many movies are based on a group of friends. An example of a friendship would be that of Sierra, Olivia, Emma, Langli, and Mallory in the movie Eight grade Whittier.\nThe word \"Friendship\" is also the official motto of Texas.\nOther websites.\nFriendship facts by RoastedBook.com"}
{"id": "22113", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22113", "title": "Clitoris", "text": "The clitoris is a female genital organ. It includes erectile tissue, glands, muscles and ligaments, nerves, and blood vessels. In an embryo there is a small raised point that grows into a clitoris in girls or a penis in boys. Inside, the penis there is the urethra, but there is no urethra in the clitoris. In women, the urethra is hidden behind the clitoris and in front of the vagina. Penises with male urethras are used daily for urination, and can be used for sex: semen passes out of the body through the male urethra. \nAlthough the parts are placed differently, the clitoris is a match to the male penis. The clitoris causes females sexual pleasure, arousal and orgasm. Rubbing or applying other consistent pressure to it is usually needed to help the female have an orgasm.\nDuring sexual arousal, erectile tissue fills with blood. This causes the clitoris to grow. It grows until orgasm happens. Also during arousal, touching the clitoris and other sensitive areas of the female genitals makes a woman's vagina change shape and release a lubricant. The lubricant and change of shape makes it easier for a man to enter a woman and for sex to occur. Most of the clitoris is hidden inside the body. Only a small part of it is seen outside the body. Adding the outside and inside parts, the clitoris is about the same size as the penis. The clitoris and penis grow from the same tissue in the womb; they bear many similar parts.\nParts of the clitoris.\nOutside the body.\nThe parts of the clitoris that can be seen from the outside are located from the \"clitoral junction\" (the point where the outer lips meet at the base of the pubic mound) to the \"fork\" (where the lower edges of the inner lips meet below the vaginal opening). The outside parts include:\nInside the body.\n The parts of the clitoris inside the body include erectile tissue, glands, muscles, blood vessels, and nerves. In both the clitoris and the penis, there are two types of erectile tissue. These are \"corpus cavernosum\" (cavern-like body) and vestibular bulbs. These tissues fill with blood during sexual arousal. This causes an erection. The clitoral shaft is connected to the glans. It is just underneath the surface of the skin. The shaft is a round spongy erectile tissue. It is very sensitive like the glans. It feels like a hard ridge. The shaft is about long. It moves toward the pubic mound for a short distance, then bends sharply and divides. This forms two thin legs. These legs are also made of spongy tissue. The legs spread out like the wishbone of a chicken."}
{"id": "22117", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22117", "title": "Berlin Wall", "text": "The Berlin Wall (German: \"Berliner Mauer\") was a wall that separated the city of Berlin in Germany from 1961 to 1989. It separated the eastern half from the western half. Many people thought it was a symbol of the Cold War. The Berlin Wall was taken down on November 9, 1989. The Berlin Wall was about long. It was built to prevent people from escaping from the eastern half of Berlin.\nDivision of Germany.\nAfter World War II ended, Germany was divided into four zones, one zone for each of the main Allied countries: France, the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union. Its capital Berlin was also divided into four zones, so that it was an enclave, like an island inside the Soviet zone. On May 8, 1949, the French, United Kingdom and US zones were made into West Germany (\"Federal Republic of Germany\", \"Bundesrepublik Deutschland\", \"BRD\") and West Berlin. The Soviet zones were made into East Germany and East Berlin. East Germany (German Democratic Republic, \"Deutsche Demokratische Republik\", \"DDR\") was founded on October 7, 1949. Europe, Germany and Berlin were divided by an iron curtain.\nWhat led to the building of the wall.\nAfter Germany split into West and East Germany on May 8, 1949, 2.6 million East Germans left to go to \"West Germany\". In Berlin alone, 3.6 million people fled to the west. To stop this, on August 13, 1961, the Communist government of East Germany built a wall separating East and West Berlin.\nThe wall was built to keep the country's people in. But the Soviets and East German government said it was to keep capitalism out. They said that West Germany refused to recognize East Germany as an independent country because they wanted to take over North-East Germany just like Hitler took over Poland.\nPeople still tried to escape even though the Berlin Wall was there. They used many methods to get around the guards and barbed wire on the Berlin Wall.\nIn the late 1980s, Mikhail Gorbachev said that the Soviet Union would not use the Red Army to stop the people of Eastern and Middle Europe from changing their government. After he said that, several countries began to change the way they governed their people. Hungary opened its border and people from East Germany began moving to the west through Hungary. In October 1989 mass demonstrations against the government in East Germany began. The long-time leader, Erich Honecker, resigned and was replaced by Egon Krenz a few days later. Honecker had predicted in January 1989 that the wall would stand for a \"hundred more years\" if the conditions which had caused its construction did not change. This did not turn out to be true.\nIn November, 1989, the Central Committee of East Germany decided to make it easier for East Germans to pass through the wall. A mistake by the press officer meant the border was opened several hours before it should have been. Millions of East German citizens celebrated the opening of the wall. Many collected souvenirs with chisels and some television stations filmed people hitting the wall with sledge hammers.\nThis image of people in West Berlin hitting the wall is often said to be East Berliners breaking out. This is not true. The eastern side of the wall had no graffiti on it. All pictures of people chipping away at the wall show people hitting graffiti covered walls. Less than one year after the Berlin Wall was broken down, Germany again became one country.\nDeath toll.\nIn the 28 years of its existence, between 125 and 206 people were killed when trying to cross the Berlin Wall. At least 800 more people were killed outside Berlin, trying to cross from East Germany to the west.\nThe East Germans did not record all of the deaths, so the real number of how many people died may never be known.\nThose people who were caught alive in an attempt to flee, had to go to jail for at least five years. The first victim of the Wall was Ida Siekmann. She was fatally injured after jumping out of the window of her apartment. She fell onto the pavement on the west side. The first victim of the Wall to be shot at was G\u00fcnter Litfin. He was 24 years old and was shot by police, near the railway station of Berlin Friedrichstrasse, when he tried to get into the West. This was on 24 August, 1961, only eleven days after the border had been closed.\nPeter Fechter bled to death in the \"death strip\", on 17 August, 1962. This led to a public outcry. American troops watched him, but could not help him. The East-German border policemen, who had wounded him, did not help him either.\nIn 1966, two children, aged ten and thirteen years, were killed in the border strip. This is unusual because the East German border police had orders to not shoot on pregnant women, children or mentally ill people.\nOn 6 February, 1989, border guards shot and killed Chris Gueffroy as he tried to cross the wall. He was the last person to be killed by border guards. On 8 March, 1989, Winfried Freudenberg died after falling from a gas balloon. He was the last person to die trying to cross the Berlin Wall and escape into West Berlin.\nThe Riots of Berlin.\nThe Berlin wall eventually started to fall once people rioted. Many jumped on top of the wall, and even crowded against it. This caused the wall to collapse in some areas, and more people could get through to the refugee camps that were set up on the other side. \"Tear down this wall!\" was a speech made by United States President Ronald Reagan to Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev to destroy the wall. The speech was made at the Brandenburg Gate near the Berlin Wall on June 12, 1987. It was made to honor the 750th anniversary of Berlin. His speech and its fallout might have aided in the wall's demolition.\nFall of the Wall.\nBy late 1989 the GDR was suffering from many problems such as a struggling economy, and large-scale protests. The Hungarian regime had collapsed and was dismantling its border fences with Austria by August 1989. Since the Warsaw Pact allowed citizens to travel within the Soviet bloc, many East German tourists fled to the west via Hungary. When the Hungarian government refused the GDR's demand to stop defectors, East Germany banned all travel to Hungary; prompting demonstrations and protest. This began the GDR's isolation within the bloc.\nErich Honecker, leader of the GDR since 1971, was forced to resign on October 18, 1989. He was replaced by Egon Krenz after a unanimous vote by the politburo. Under Krenz's regime, East Germans could still escape to Hungary via Czechoslovakia.\nThe number of defectors grew and caused tensions between East Germany and Czechoslovakia. The Krenz regime decided to allow people to leave directly to the west through border checkpoints in East Berlin. This prompted many East Germans, who learned about it broadcast from West German media, to go to the border crossings and demand to be let through immediately.\nBorder guards at each checkpoint told the people to go back home as they had no orders that the wall would open that night. As time passed, the number of people arriving at the checkpoint was increasing and the guards were becoming alarmed. They began taking the more aggressive people aside and stamped their passports with a special stamp that allowed them access to West Berlin however, the people were not aware that they were effectively revoking their East German citizenship and were shocked to be refused entry back into the GDR. The Chief Guard of the checkpoint frantically telephoned his superiors hoping to get answers as to why so many people thought that the wall was to open. By 22:45, it was clear that the outnumbered and overwhelmed border guards would not use their weapons to suppress the crowds. The Chief Guard surrendered and ordered the gates to West Berlin to be opened. The crowds of East Berliners were met with crowds of West Berliners in a happy scene as the Berlin wall had just fallen.\nMany people even climbed up onto the wall by the Brandenburg Gate in protest and began to chisel away at the wall. The GDR authorities responded to this initially by blasting the people with water cannons; this proved to be ineffective. The East German army later climbed up onto the wall to prevent others from standing on the wall. The government began demolishing the wall the next day. The fall of the wall destroyed the SED, the ruling party of the GDR, and caused many of its officials to resign. The German Democratic Republic would cease to exist less than a year later; reuniting with the Federal Republic of Germany on October 3, 1990.\nWhat the wall was made of.\nThe wall was changed and added to several times. It was not really a wall, but a collection of walls and fences and other devices. This is what the \"border fence\" was made of, starting from the east, going west\nThe whole was done in an a zone of between 30 and 500 m wide. The official (\"civil\" border) began before the first fence. Entering the installation required a special permit. The real border was about one or two metres in front of the concrete wall, so that the whole of the wall complex was inside East Germany (only the East Berlin part of the wall was inside East Berlin).\nThe border between East Germany and West Germany was also heavily defended with fences and mines. East Germans needed a special permit to live close to the border.\nWhat is left today.\nAfter the Reunification of Germany in October 3, 1990, the Berlin Wall was demolished and taken away. A few sections of the wall remain; some of the sections became a museum.\nControversies.\nThe East Berlin special police who guarded the wall had the order to shoot if this was necessary to stop people fleeing. East German leaders such as Egon Krenz were arrested after German reunification because guards were ordered to shoot to kill.\nHowever, after the Wall was built, many people were no longer able to leave East Berlin using normal border posts. The only way they could do so was to race through the Wall or try to dig a tunnel underneath.\nAfter the unification of Germany, border guards who had shot people were convicted by West German Courts. The judges said, that some of the laws of the border police (about shooting) were against human rights. They therefore should have refused to shoot.\nThe same was of course applied to those people who had shot border police on their flight.\nBorder guards who did shoot, and stop someone from fleeing could get a reward of up to 500 Marks. Some of those guards were sentenced after the unification.\nThe other choice was to not shoot, or to miss badly. Such guards risked losing their well-paid jobs.\nCuriosities.\nAnother strip of land was given to West Berlin. This strip was only the width of a road which joined West Berlin with a tiny exclave."}
{"id": "22118", "revid": "7701540", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22118", "title": "\u0141\u00f3d\u017a", "text": "\u0141\u00f3d\u017a (pronounced \"wuj\") is the third-largest city in Poland, with 776,000 inhabitants. It is in the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Voivodeship in the centre of the country. In Polish the name also means \"boat\". The mayor of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a is Hanna Zdanowska.\nHistory.\nThe first documents mentioning the city date from 1332. \u0141\u00f3d\u017a was awarded city rights (according to the Magdeburg law) in 1432. The Congress of Vienna decided in 1815 that the city should be part of Russia. Only in 1918 did the city fall back to Poland.\nGeography.\nThe city is about 120 km south-west of Warsaw. In and around the city, there are some textile and electronics industries. Because of prolonged economic difficulties, there has been a decline in the population of the city. The city has a university and a film academy. \u0141\u00f3d\u017a has a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\" in the Koeppen climate classification). \nSports.\nThere are two major football teams in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a: the first is called \u0141KS \u0141\u00f3d\u017a and the second is Widzew \u0141\u00f3d\u017a."}
{"id": "22119", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22119", "title": "Krak\u00f3w", "text": "Krak\u00f3w (Polish: \"Krak\u00f3w\"; (pronounced: ); variant English spelling Cracow; in full Royal Capital City of Krakow, Polish: Kr\u00f3lewskie Sto\u0142eczne Miasto Krak\u00f3w) is one of the oldest and largest cities in Poland. In 2014 in Krak\u00f3w lived 759,800 people. It is on the Vistula river. Krakow is the capital of Lesser Poland Voivodeship (\"wojew\u00f3dztwo ma\u0142opolskie\"); before that it was the capital of Krak\u00f3w Voivodship (since 14th century).\nDuring the mid-early 19th century, Krakow became an independent city-state, under the name of \"The Free, Independent and Strictly Neutral City of Krakow\". However, it was annexed by Austria-Hungary in 1846.\nPope John Paul II was raised in Krakow and was its archbishop from 1964 until he was elected as Pope in 1978. When it was later announced that the city will host World Youth Day in 2016, it will be a tribute to the late Pope who became a saint in 2014.\nThe current mayor of Krakow is Jacek Majchrowski.\nSister cities.\nKrak\u00f3w is twinned, or maintains close relations with:"}
{"id": "22121", "revid": "7766042", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22121", "title": "Portland, Oregon", "text": "Portland is the largest city in the U.S. state of Oregon. It is the county seat of Multnomah County. About 538,544 people live in the city of Portland, and about 1,927,881 people live in the city's metropolitan area. It is found in the north part of the state, where the Willamette River meets the Columbia River. Portland has the second most people of any city in the Northwest United States, after the city of Seattle.\nPortland has many nicknames. One of these is \"The City of Roses,\" because roses grow well there. Some other nicknames of Portland are \"Stumptown\" (from the fact that Portland was built over a forest), and \"Puddletown\" (from the fact that it often rains in Portland).\nMany things are from Portland. Some of these things are Powell's Books, Beverly Cleary (and some of her most popular fictional characters, Henry Huggins and Ramona Quimby, which also have statues in the city's \"Beverly Cleary Sculpture Garden for Children\"), and the Portland Trail Blazers basketball team."}
{"id": "22122", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22122", "title": "Paedophile", "text": ""}
{"id": "22125", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22125", "title": "Schrodinger equation", "text": ""}
{"id": "22126", "revid": "1140338", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22126", "title": "Frame of reference", "text": "In physics, a frame of reference, or reference frame, is a perspective that one uses to determine if an object is moving. A frame of reference consists of an object or environment that is considered to be stationary. Typically the observer is at rest in the reference frame; in this context, the term is \"observational frame of reference.\"\nFor example, when you see a ball roll down a street, you can tell the ball is moving because the frame of reference is the streets, whatever may be on the side of the roads, or the Earth. All of these are frames of reference.\nAll measurements of motion will be compared to a frame of reference. Therefore, the most commonly used frame of reference is Earth itself, even though it moves. Stars are used as a frame of reference when discussing the motions of the Earth.\nWhen we walk from one side of a ship to the other, our frame of reference is the ship; whether the ship is moving is not relevant to that frame of reference.\nInertial frame of reference.\nAn inertial frame of reference is a frame that is either not moving or moving at a constant velocity. In other words, an inertial frame of reference has no net force acting upon it, and therefore Newton's laws of motion are observed.\nInertial reference frames are often used in general relativity and special relativity to describe relative motion of observers or objects and the effects they will endure.\nInertial frames of reference are useful in everyday life as well. For example, consider a situation where two cars are traveling along a road. See Figure 1. If they are separated by a distance of 100 meters, the car in the back is moving at 10 meters per second and the car in front is moving at 5 meters per second, both relative to the ground.\nThere are three obvious inertial reference frames that can be used to determine when the cars will be even with each other: one where the back car is not moving but the front car is moving backwards at 5\u00a0m/s, one where the front car is stationary and the back car is moving forward at 5\u00a0m/s, or one where the ground is not moving and the cars are moving at their given velocities. These three perspectives all describe the situation accurately and are physically identical."}
{"id": "22130", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22130", "title": "Broadway", "text": "Broadway is a -long main street in New York City. It is different from other streets in that it runs diagonally across the street grid of Manhattan, diagonally crossing newer streets. The street also goes through the Bronx. It continues north as U.S. Route 9 to Albany, the capital of New York State.\nTimes Square, where Broadway meets 7th Avenue and 42nd Street, is a center of entertainment and is famous for its many theaters and stage plays. \nOne of the New York City Subway lines, the BMT Broadway Line, runs under the street in Manhattan, south of Times Square. The IRT Broadway - Seventh Avenue Line runs under Broadway, north of Times Square."}
{"id": "22137", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22137", "title": "Frame of referance", "text": ""}
{"id": "22138", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22138", "title": "Schr\u00f6dinger equation", "text": "The Schr\u00f6dinger equation is a differential equation (a type of equation that involves an unknown function rather than an unknown number) that forms the basis of quantum mechanics, one of the most accurate theories of how subatomic particles behave. It is a mathematical equation that was thought of by Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger in 1925. It defines a wave function of a particle or system (group of particles) which has a certain value at every point in space for every given time. These values have no physical meaning (in fact, they are mathematically complex), yet the wave function contains all information that can be known about a particle or system. This information can be found by mathematically manipulating the wave function to return real values relating to physical properties such as position, momentum, energy, etc. The wave function can be thought of as a picture of how this particle or system acts with time and describes it as fully as possible.\nThe wave function can be in a number of different states at once, and so a particle may have many different positions, energies, velocities or other physical properties at the same time (i.e. \"be in two places at once\"). However, when one of these properties is measured it has only one specific value (which cannot be definitely predicted), and the wave function is therefore in just one specific state. This is called wave function collapse and seems to be caused by the act of observation or measurement. The exact cause and interpretation of wave function collapse is still widely debated in the scientific community.\nFor one particle that only moves in one direction in space, the Schr\u00f6dinger equation looks like:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the square root of -1, formula_3 is the reduced Planck's constant, formula_4 is time, formula_5 is a position, formula_6 is the wave function, and formula_7 is the potential energy, an as yet not chosen function of position. The left hand side is equivalent to the Hamiltonian energy operator acting on formula_8.\nTime independent Version.\nAssuming that the wave function, formula_9, is separable, i.e. assuming the function of two variables can be written as the product of two different functions of a single variable:\nformula_10\nthen, using standard mathematical techniques of Partial differential equations, it can be shown that the wave equation can be rewritten as two distinct differential equations\nformula_11\nformula_12\nwhere the first equation is solely dependent on time formula_13, and the second equation depends only on position formula_14, and where formula_15 is just a number. The first equation can be solved immediately to give\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17 is Euler's number. Solutions of the second equation depend on the potential energy function, formula_7, and so cannot be solved until this function is given. It can be shown using quantum mechanics that the number formula_15 is actually the energy of the system, so these separable wave functions describe systems of constant energy. Since energy is constant in many important physical systems (for example: an electron in an atom), the second equation of the set of separated differential equations presented above is often used. This equation is known as the Time independent Schr\u00f6dinger Equation, as it does not involve formula_4.\nInterpretations of the Wave function.\nBorn Interpretation.\nThere are many philosophical interpretations of the wave function, and a few of the leading ideas will be considered here. The main idea, called the Born probability interpretation (named after physicist Max Born) comes from the simple idea that the wave function is square integrable; i.e.\nformula_21\nThis rather simple formula has great physical implications. Born hypothesized that the above integral determines that the particle \"exists somewhere in space\". But how can we find it? We use the integral \nformula_22 to formula_23. In other words, all that can be known in advance about a particle in general are probabilities, averages, and other statistical quantities associated with its physical quantities (position, momentum, etc.). Basically, this is the Born interpretation.\nCopenhagen Interpretation.\nAn extension of the above ideas can be made. Since the Born interpretation says that the actual position particle cannot be known, we can derive the following. If formula_24 are solutions to the wave equation, then the superposition of those solutions, i.e.\nformula_25\nis also a solution. This implies, then, that the particle exists in every possible position. When an observer comes and measures the position of the particle, then the superposition is reduced to a single possible wave function. (i.e., formula_26 \u2192 formula_27, where formula_27 is any of the possible wave function states.) This idea that a particle's position cannot exactly be known, and that a particle exists in multiple positions simultaneously gives rise to the Uncertainty principle. The mathematical formulation of this principle can be given by\nformula_29\nWhere formula_30 is the uncertainty in position, and formula_31 is the uncertainty in momentum. This principle can be mathematically derived from the Fourier transforms between momentum and position as defined by quantum mechanics, but we will not derive it in this article. \nOther Interpretations.\nThere are various other interpretations, such as the many-worlds interpretation, and quantum determinism. "}
{"id": "22139", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22139", "title": "Schroedinger equation", "text": ""}
{"id": "22140", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22140", "title": "Physicists", "text": ""}
{"id": "22142", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22142", "title": "Lodz", "text": ""}
{"id": "22144", "revid": "114482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22144", "title": "Cracow", "text": ""}
{"id": "22145", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22145", "title": "Testes", "text": ""}
{"id": "22146", "revid": "103759", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22146", "title": "Tashiro Masashi", "text": ""}
{"id": "22149", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22149", "title": "Gustav Jung", "text": ""}
{"id": "22150", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22150", "title": "Nutmeg", "text": "Nutmeg (\"Myristica fragrans\") is a species of evergreen tree in the genus \"Myristica\". It is found in tropical Southeast Asia and Australia.\nNutmeg powder can cause allergic reactions. "}
{"id": "22151", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22151", "title": "Mace (spice)", "text": ""}
{"id": "22153", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22153", "title": "Run (island)", "text": "Pulau Run is an island in Indonesia. It is one of the smallest Islands of the Banda Islands. It is about 3\u00a0km long and less than 1\u00a0km wide.\nIt used to be of great importance, because of the value of the spices nutmeg and \"mace\". Both spices are from the same tree. The trees were only grown on the Banda Islands. During the history of the spice trade sailors of the British East India Company of the second expedition of James Lancaster, John Davis and John Middleton who stayed in Bantam on Java first reached the Island in 1603. They made good contacts with the people who lived there.\nTwo wars were fought over the extremely costly spices.\nThe Treaty of Westminster ended the First Anglo-Dutch War of 1652\u20131654. According to the treaty, Run should have been returned to England. The first attempt in 1660 failed due to formal constraints by the Dutch; after the second in 1665 the English traders were expelled in the same year and the Dutch destroyed the nutmeg trees.\nAfter the second Anglo-Dutch War of 1665\u20131667 England and the United Provinces of the Netherlands agreed in the Treaty of Breda to the status quo: The English kept the island of Manhattan which a fleet sent by the Duke of York (the future Charles II), had occupied illegally in 1664 and renamed from New Amsterdam to New York. Run was officially given to the Dutch.\nThe Dutch monopoly on nutmeg and mace was destroyed by the transfer of nutmeg trees to Ceylon, Singapore and other British colonies in 1817 after the capture of the main Island Bandalontor in 1810 by Captain Cole. This led to the decline of the Dutch supremacy in the spice trade, but there are still nutmeg trees growing on Run today."}
{"id": "22156", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22156", "title": "Shinty", "text": "Shinty a traditional game now mainly played in the Scottish Highlands. It involves 2 teams of twelve players using a stick (known as a \"caman\" from Scottish Gaelic) to put a ball in the opposing team's net.\nIt was once played over all Scotland but is now played mostly in the Scottish Highlands and Highland communities in the big Scottish cities. It is also played in universities and in America by enthusiasts.\nThe sport's rules and regulations are decided by the Camanachd Association.\nIt has a common ancestor with the Irish game of hurling and hurlers and shinty players sometimes hold internationals."}
{"id": "22159", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22159", "title": "Planets", "text": ""}
{"id": "22160", "revid": "133706", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22160", "title": "1229", "text": ""}
{"id": "22162", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22162", "title": "1626", "text": ""}
{"id": "22163", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22163", "title": "1399", "text": ""}
{"id": "22164", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22164", "title": "54", "text": "54 is a year in the 1st century."}
{"id": "22165", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22165", "title": "48", "text": "48 is a year in the 1st century. It was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vitellius and Poplicola."}
{"id": "22166", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22166", "title": "1244", "text": ""}
{"id": "22167", "revid": "133706", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22167", "title": "1253", "text": ""}
{"id": "22168", "revid": "145452", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22168", "title": "1627", "text": ""}
{"id": "22169", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22169", "title": "1645", "text": ""}
{"id": "22170", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22170", "title": "1072", "text": ""}
{"id": "22171", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22171", "title": "1263", "text": ""}
{"id": "22172", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22172", "title": "1264", "text": ""}
{"id": "22173", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22173", "title": "1641", "text": ""}
{"id": "22174", "revid": "503229", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22174", "title": "1680", "text": "Year 1680 was a leap year that started on a Monday when using the Gregorian calendar."}
{"id": "22175", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22175", "title": "814", "text": "814 was ."}
{"id": "22206", "revid": "4779569", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22206", "title": "Manx", "text": "The word Manx could mean many things related to the Isle of Man:"}
{"id": "22207", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22207", "title": "Hierarchy", "text": "A hierarchy (in ; this comes from '-hieros, sacred, and '-arkho, rule) is a way of ranking and organizing things or people. Beneath the top of the hierarchy, each part of it is below some other part. This turns out to be like a pyramid. It is a system to decide who can make decisions, and who is forced to comply with those decisions.\nAn example with people would be the structure of a company. There is the top manager, and there are a few levels of middle and lower management. At the bottom are the common workers. Another example would be an army that might have a general, followed by colonels, corporals, and sergeants, then privates.\nIn democracy this is done by educating people in the issues and then voting - in an election to choose leaders, or a referendum to actually choose one option from several. Competing power networks each form a political party and each offers only one leader or one option to the public, to simplify the issues to make decisions possible. After the decision, they typically do not fight it to the point of civil war, but wait for the next election.\nIn dictatorship this is done by asking one powerful person to make the decision and then agreeing to force everyone to follow it. Any who will not are exiled, imprisoned, or killed, even if the decision is not very important, since the refusal to follow is taken as a challenge to the power structure itself. There is only one power network and all others are forced to become part of it, or fight it. Civil war is much more common in a dictatorship than in a democracy.\nIn these examples, people who are higher up have more authority and power than people below them."}
{"id": "22212", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22212", "title": "Sir Robert Peel", "text": ""}
{"id": "22213", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22213", "title": "Ants", "text": ""}
{"id": "22214", "revid": "7757671", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22214", "title": "Sultan", "text": "Sultan is a name for Islamic rulers. \nThe word \"sultan\" comes from the Arabic language. It means \"strength\", \"authority\", or \"rulership\". Later, it came to be used as the title of certain Muslim rulers who claimed full sovereignty. They did not have to take orders from any higher monarch, without claiming the overall caliphate. There is no specific word for a sultan's wife in Arabic. The word, \"sultana\" began to be used (as the feminine version of the Italian word for \"sultano\") in the 16th century in Italy, to describe the wife, mother, daughter, or concubine of a sultan. The Italian word also passed to other European languages.\nThe dynasty and lands ruled by the Sultan is called a sultanate. During the 20th century, several Sultans in the Arab world changed their title to \"Malik\", which means \"king\" in Arabic. "}
{"id": "22215", "revid": "7860308", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22215", "title": "States and union territories of India", "text": "The Republic of India is divided into twenty-eight States,and eight union territories including the National Capital Territory.\nStates and capitals.\nUnion territories:\nFamous Indian Cities:\n1. Aligarh 1 \n2. (Ayodhya) ancien nom - Faizabad \n3. Aagra \n4. Ambedkar Nagar \n5. Azamgarh \n6. Ameti \n7. Amroha \n8. Auraiya \n9. Bijnor \n10. Ballia \n11. Balrampur \n12. Bhadohi Ancien nom - / Sant Ravidas Nagar \n13. Budaun \n14. Barabanki \n15. Basti \n16. Bareilly \n17. Bahraich \n18. Bagpat \n19. Bulandshahar \n20. Gang \n21. Chitrakut \n22. Chanduli \n23. Deoria \n24. Etava \n25. Cette \n26. Farrukhabad \n27. Fatehpur \n28. Firozabad \n29. Ghaziabad \n30. Gorakhpur \n31. Gautama Bouddha Nagar \n32. Gonda \n33. Gazipur \n34. Khatras \n35. Hamirpur \n36. Hardoi \n37. Khapur \n38. Jaunpur \n39. Jalaun \n40. Jhansi \n41. Kanpur dehat \n42. Kushinagar \n43. Kanpur nagar \n44. Kannauj \n45. Kaushambi \n46. Kasganj \n47. Lahimpur Heri \n48. Lucknow -le prix /) \n49. \n50. Muzaffarnagar \n51. Machoba \n52. Mirzapur \n53. Moradabad \n54. Meerut \n55. \n56. Maharajganj"}
{"id": "22217", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22217", "title": "Frankfurt/Main", "text": ""}
{"id": "22220", "revid": "1153556", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22220", "title": "Finnish language", "text": "Finnish () is a Uralic language. It is one of the two official languages of Finland. It is also an official minority language in Sweden. Finnish is one of the four national languages of Europe that is not an Indo-European language. The other two are Estonian and Hungarian, which are also Uralic languages, and Basque.\nRelated languages.\nThe Finnish grammar and most Finnish words are very different from those in other European languages, because Finnish is not an Indo-European language. The two other national languages that are Uralic languages as Finnish are Estonian and Hungarian. Estonians and Finns usually may understand each other, but their languages are very different. Even though Finnish and Hungarian are related languages, they do not look or sound similar. The Finnish and Hungarian languages separated a long time ago, and each language developed its own vocabulary. People who can speak Finnish cannot understand Hungarian without extra study, and Hungarians cannot understand Finnish. However, there are some basic words that are very similar, for example: 'hand' (Finnish 'k\u00e4si' vs. Hungarian 'k\u00e9z') 'to go' (Finnish 'menn\u00e4' vs. Hungarian 'menni'), 'fish' (Finnish 'kala' vs. Hungarian 'hal').\nFinnish grammar.\nFinnish is a synthetic and an agglutinative language. This means that words in Finnish have a stem called \"body\", and other parts inside them which make up the meaning. Finnish is similar in this respect to the Japanese language, Turkish language, and Latin language. In Finnish, there are 17 cases/word types (sanatyypit). You can think of a \"case\" as an ending added to a word that helps describe its purpose in the sentence. Verbs have 5 tempora (present tense, past tense, perfect, pluperfect and future tense). In addition, verbs have two participle (active and passive) cases. Gerunds, which are nouns made from verbs (for example: reading - to read) also exist in Finnish (lukeminen - lukea), are abundant in Finnish.\nFinnish is a complex, self-morphing language. It has been ranked as a highly difficult language for native speakers of English by the U.S. Department of State. The difficulty is due not only to the grammatical structure of the language, but also pronunciation and intonation as compared to English.\nFinnish spelling and pronunciation.\nFinnish is pronounced the way it is spelled. The pronunciation of some letters is similar to English. However:\nEnglish speakers often exhale when saying letters like \"k\", \"p\", and \"t\". They don't do this in Finnish, and to \"swallow the sound\", as the old saying goes, takes a lot of practice.\nThe proper pronunciation for the Finnish diphthongs (\u00f6y, y\u00f6, \u00e4y, eu, etc.) is difficult."}
{"id": "22224", "revid": "7797062", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22224", "title": "Sleep", "text": "Sleep is a state of resting, which happens in animals, including humans. During deep sleep, most of the muscles that animals can otherwise control are not active, but regain the energy for the next time they wake up. Animals during sleep are usually in an unconscious, relaxed state. Like most animals, healthy sleep in humans takes place at night. Asleep describes the condition where animals are in the process of sleeping. During this time, they will not react as quickly (if at all) as they would if they were awake. They can, however, wake up from sleep more easily than from hibernation or coma. All mammals, birds, many reptiles, amphibians and fish have a sleep cycle. In humans, other mammals, and most other animals that were studied, regular sleep is essential for survival.\nSleep is extremely important to human health and well-being. Humans and animals need sleep in order for their bodies to be prepared for the next day. Everyday activities, one\u2019s appearance, and how one expresses oneself all rely on this necessity. If one is tired (from not getting enough sleep), one will not be able to function properly in common activities. Being sleep-deprived leads to struggling to remember information, altering one\u2019s mood, energy, health, focus and a number of other effects. Sleep deprivation (not allowing a person enough sleep) can even be used as torture. Also, the immune system releases compounds known as cytokines which are used to help fight inflammation and infection. If a person does not receive enough sleep, they will not have enough cytokines to protect them from getting sick. The body may not have time to complete memory recollection, muscle repair, and release hormones that regulate growth and appetite.\nDuring daytime, the sun is out and most people are awake. They work, go to school, or complete daily errands and activities. Many people sleep for a short time in the early afternoon for a quick rest\u2014or because they are not able to sleep during the day. This is called a nap. A successful nap should run between 15-30 minutes, and longer naps taking 30-60 minutes will result in feeling dazed and less attentive.\nIn some countries, most notably where the weather is warm, there is a tradition to take a nap right after noon, or early in the afternoon. This tradition is called siesta, and is most common in Spain and Latin America. Some stores and services close while their owners and/or employees take their siesta.\nWord.\nThe word \"sleep\" comes from the old Old Germanic verbs for sleep. In Old and Middle High German, it was called \"SLAF\". The original meaning of the word was \"to slap\", which was related to the word for \"flabby\" (not hard or firm).\nMany words related to \"sleep\" have very different meanings. For example, \"sleep\" may be used to mean death, so that \"putting an animal to sleep\" means to kill the animal without pain. \"Sleep with someone\" can also have a sexual meaning.\nWhat sleep is for.\nGenerally, the reason for sleep is that the brain needs it. The details are not fully understood, but it is important to get enough sleep for the body and the brain to be healthy and to work properly. In general, animals (and people) sleep at periodic intervals, such as once a day. Certain animals send out signals to the others that they will soon go to sleep. Yawning is such a signal.\nBoth humans and many animals sleep about once a day. Some animals, such as cats, sleep many times a day for short periods up to 15 hours a day (or even longer).\nWhen people sleep, they often have dreams. Probably some animals do, too.\nNot only people sleep, but all mammals and birds, and most fish, reptiles and other animals also too.\nBrief stages of sleep.\nThere are four stages during sleep:\nWhile humans sleep, REM and NREM are sleep patterns that help with long term memory, remembering information, procedural memory, and creative thinking.\nDifferent types of sleep.\nREM sleep.\nIn mammals and birds, sleep can be divided into two categories. In one of them, the eyes move rapidly. It is called REM-sleep (rapid eye movement). Most dreams take place in this phase. as the body becomes relaxed and the eyes move while sleeping. This phase helps prepare one for the next day. REM-sleep occurs normally at intervals throughout the night, and the periods of REM-sleep increase in length in the second half of the night. It is often encountered 90 minutes after falling asleep, and continues to occur every 90 minutes. REM-sleep was first discovered in 195253.\nREM sleep is found in mammals and songbirds, but is \"poorly established\" in reptiles and fish. According to a survey:\nNREM sleep.\nThe other category, where this movement of the eyes does not happen, is called NREM-sleep (Non-REM sleep). In general, dreams do not occur during this time. There are three or four stages of NREM-sleep. Stage I is just barely sleeping, or dozing. Stage II is also light sleep. Normally, in adult humans, about half of the time spent asleep is spent in light sleep. Stages III and IV are called deep sleep. Deep sleep is necessary for growth and healing. It can be quite difficult to awaken someone who is in stage III or stage IV sleep. Sometimes, stages III and IV are combined and called stage III.\nAdult humans normally sleep in cycles of 90 to 110 minutes each. The night's sleep can be 4 or 5 of these cycles. Each cycle includes, in this order: stage I, stage II, stage III (IV), and REM.\nGetting enough sleep.\nPeople who regularly get less than 8 hours of sleep a night tend to complain more and feel very fatigued throughout the day. Getting the appropriate amount of sleep is extremely important, as it could affect one\u2019s body and increase the chances of serious health problems. For each age group, there are different amounts of sleep that are recommended:\n- Toddlers (4 to 12 months): 12 to 16 hours (w/ naps)\n- Toddlers (1-2 years): 11 to 14 hours (w/ naps)\n- Preschoolers (3-5 years): 10 to 13 hours (w/ naps)\n- Grade Schoolers (6 to 12 years): 9 to 12 hours \n- Teenagers(13-18 years): 8 to 10 hours\n- Adults (including old age): 7 to 9 hours \nThe timing of sleep and the amount of it are both important. Both are different for different people. Some adults sleep best from 22:00 to 05:00 or 06:00 or 07:00. Some sleep best from midnight to seven or eight. These variations are normal.\nHow much sleep is enough also depends on age. Children need more sleep than adults. Newborn babies sleep about 18 hours per day. Small babies sleep many times a day; human babies do not develop circadian rhythms before they are 3 \u2013 4 months old. At the age of 1 year, they sleep for about 14 hours.\nA nine-year-old should sleep about 9\u201310 hours per day and teenagers, too, also need that much sleep. Adults who sleep less than about 8 hours a day perform worse than those who sleep that long.\nBad habits.\nPoor habits could affect one\u2019s sleep schedule in many ways without taking notice. A few habits that are very common and ruin sleep are:\nSleeping problems.\nA good night\u2019s sleep is extremely important for one\u2019s quality of life. People may have trouble going to sleep, staying asleep or getting enough sleep. This usually means that they are too sleepy in the daytime.\nThere are many things that influence sleep. Also some substances, called stimulants \u2013 coffee is an example \u2013 can cause poor sleep. When people have just eaten something, the body is busy digesting what they have eaten. This can cause poor sleep, too. Worrying and stress can also cause poor sleep.\nThere are many diseases that cause poor sleep. Fever can lead to bad dreams. Poor sleep can be a side effect of some medications.\nSleep disorders directly influence how a person sleeps. Examples of sleep disorders are narcolepsy, sleep apnea and circadian rhythm sleep disorders.\nThe four most common sleep disorders are:\nSleep specialists - doctors specialized in sleeping problems - often suggest better sleep hygiene to people with sleeping problems. Sleep hygiene means things people can try, such as: "}
{"id": "22242", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22242", "title": "North Macedonia", "text": "North Macedonia (Macedonian: \u0421\u0435\u0432\u0435\u0440\u043d\u0430 \u041c\u0430\u043a\u0435\u0434\u043e\u043d\u0438\u0458\u0430 - Severna Makedonija) officially the Republic of North Macedonia (Macedonian: \"\u0420\u0435\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430 \u0421\u0435\u0432\u0435\u0440\u043d\u0430 \u041c\u0430\u043a\u0435\u0434\u043e\u043d\u0438\u0458\u0430\" - \"Republika Severna Makedonija\" (Albanian: Republika e Maqedonis\u00eb s\u00eb Veriut ) is a country located on the Balkan peninsula and in Southeastern Europe. It was part of Yugoslavia. North Macedonia borders Serbia to the north, Albania to the west, Greece to the south, and Bulgaria to the east. The country's currency is the Macedonian denar (MKD).\nThe capital and largest city is Skopje, with more than 500,000 residents. It has many smaller cities. Some important ones are Bitola, Prilep, Tetovo, Kumanovo, Ohrid, Veles, Stip, and Strumica.\nNorth Macedonia is often called \"a land of lakes and mountains\". There are more than 50 lakes and sixteen mountains higher than 2000 meters above sea level.\nNorth Macedonia is a member of the United Nations and World Trade Organization (WTO). It joined NATO on 30 March 2020. Since December 2005, it is a candidate for joining the European Union. \nThe language spoken by the majority of the population is Macedonian. Albanian is also spoken by the Albanian minority (25%) living in the country. North Macedonia has two official languages, Macedonian and Albanian (since 2019).\nHistory.\nEthnic Macedonians are Slavic peoples. The Slavs invaded and settled the Balkans in the 6th and 7th centuries. What is now North Macedonia used to be the Bulgarian occupation zone of Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Vardarska Macedonia became a Communist state in 1945 and called itself the Socialist Republic of Macedonia in the southeastern part of the country of Yugoslavia. When that country broke up in 1991, North Macedonia became independent. \nIn past centuries the territory which today is the Republic of North Macedonia was ruled by many different states such as Bulgaria and many other empires.\nDuring the Yugoslav Wars, Macedonia was mostly peaceful. However in 2001, fighting broke out between ethnic Albanians and Slavic Macedonians. The fighting ended with the Ohrid Agreement. \nEarliest Residents.\nPeople have been living in North Macedonia for over 1000 years[sic] (10,000 years). The first people that lived in Macedonia were the Neolithic people. They lived in Macedonia from 7000 to 3500 BCE. From 1000 to 1 BCE, Dacians, Thracians,Illyrians, Celts, and Greeks inhabited Northern Macedonia. \nAlexander the Great's Empire.\nThe Ancient Greek kingdom of Macedonia was just hundreds of small, independent, city-states. One example of a city state is Illyria. They sometimes merged together, but not often. One city-state that grew over time was the kingdom of Macedon. The Greek kingdom of Macedon is best known for Alexander the Great. He invaded and controlled the Middle East (excluding Arabia),Turkey, Greece, Egypt, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Gujarat state of India. However, when Alexander died in 323 BCE, at the age of 33, he lost his vast empire. The empire was divided into 5 countries, Lysimachia (Macedon), Cassander (Northern Greece), the Antigonid Empire (Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Southern Greece), the Ptolemaic Empire (Egypt), and the Seleucid Empire (Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan).\nRoman Rule.\nTowards the end of the 3rd century BCE, the Romans invaded the Balkan peninsula. Illyria was taken over in 9 CE. The North and East of Macedonia were taken over by the Roman Empire in the year 29 CE. They became the Roman province of Moesia. Starting in the 3rd century CE, the borders of Macedonia were being attacked by the Goths, Huns, Bulgars, Avars, and others. In 395 AD, the Roman Empire split in two. They were the Western Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantine Empire).\nByzantine Rule.\nAlthough, Macedonia was part of the Byzantine Empire, there was little Byzantine influence. In the mid-6th century, Slavic tribes started to settle in Macedonia. From the 7th century to the 13th century, Byzantine Macedonia was governed by local princes and kings, allied with the Byzantine Empire. In the 9th century, the Byzantine Empire brought Christianity to Macedonia. The people who brought Christianity to Macedonia were saints Cyril and Methodius. Their goal was to bring Christianity and the Cyrillic alphabet to Slavs in Europe.\nOttoman Rule.\nThe Ottoman Empire was originally a small city-state in Turkey. The city-state grew, and it invaded Adrianople in 1354. From there, it expanded and took over Turkey. Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, did not get invaded by the Ottomans until 1453. After the Battle of the Maritsa River, the Ottomans conquered southern Serbia and Macedonia. Macedonia was under Ottoman Rule until 1913.\nYugoslav Rule.\nAfter the Ottoman Empire dissolved, Macedonia became a part of the newly formed country Yugoslavia. From 1914 to 1941, Yugoslavia was a monarchy. During WW2, the Axis Powers took over Yugoslavia. Macedonia was taken over by Bulgaria. The Axis powers left Yugoslavia after WW2. After WW2, Yugoslavia became a communist state. Josip Broz Tito was the leader of Yugoslavia from 1944 to 1980. In 8 September 1991, Macedonia became an independent state.\nNaming dispute with Greece.\nGreece and the Republic of North Macedonia were arguing over the name Macedonia. The United Nations calls the Republic of North Macedonia, \"the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia\" (FYROM) (Macedonian: \"\u041f\u043e\u0440\u0430\u043d\u0435\u0448\u043d\u0430 \u0408\u0443\u0433\u043e\u0441\u043b\u043e\u0432\u0435\u043d\u0441\u043a\u0430 \u0420\u0435\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430 \u041c\u0430\u043a\u0435\u0434\u043e\u043d\u0438\u0458\u0430 - \u041f\u0408\u0420\u041c\" - \"Porane\u0161na Jugoslovenska Republika Makedonija -PJRM\"). The north and northeast part of Greece has been called Macedonia for ages and officially since 1912, just like Kent, the southeast county of England, has been called Kent for a long time. 'FYROM' is also used by NATO and many other international organisations. But, many countries now call the country 'Republic of Macedonia'. The United Kingdom, for example, uses Republic of Macedonia in the diplomatic list.\nOn 17 June 2018, North Macedonia and Greece agreed to the Prespa agreement which would see the country change its name to the Republic of North Macedonia. The government started completing the constitutional change needed to change the country's name, which was completed on 12 February 2019.\nPolitics.\nNorth Macedonia is a democratic country with a parliament."}
{"id": "22246", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22246", "title": "J.K. Rowling", "text": ""}
{"id": "22248", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22248", "title": "Anorexia nervosa", "text": "Anorexia nervosa (usually just called anorexia) is an eating disorder. \nPeople with anorexia think that they are fat, or desperately fear becoming fat even if they are very skinny. To try to lose weight, anorexics do not eat enough. When they do eat, they do not eat the amount of food their body needs, in an effort to avoid gaining weight. This causes them to lose too much weight too quickly. This is very harmful to a person's body. There are various treatments for anorexia. One example is the Maudsley Method. This type of treatment is for patients who are 18 or younger. Two thirds of adolescent anorexia patients are 'recovered' at the end of this treatment. People with anorexia are more likely to die than people with any other mental illness.\nDiagnosis.\nDoctors use the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" to make a medical diagnosis and decide if a person has anorexia or not. Four signs of anorexia are listed in the manual. People do not have to show all four signs for the doctor to decide that they have anorexia.\nCauses.\nThere is no single cause of anorexia. Researchers believe that it is caused by a combination of biological and environmental factors. It has been linked to the media. Many people think that anorexia is caused by wanting to be thin like models in magazines. However, it is not that simple.\nPeople who develop anorexia tend to be perfectionistic. They are also more likely to have problems socializing. There has been research about the link between anorexia and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a disorder that involves problems with socializing. Another symptom of autism spectrum disorder is OCD, which has also been linked to anorexia. Starvation is known to create antisocial behavior so there needs to be research that compares those traits in anorexics with people who have recovered."}
{"id": "22249", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22249", "title": "Madness", "text": "Madness (or Insanity) is a word that can have different meanings:\nBeing able to tell right from wrong is the base of a working society and of law; for this reason, the law treats those people differently who are not able to make this distinction."}
{"id": "22250", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22250", "title": "Insanity", "text": ""}
{"id": "22251", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22251", "title": "Rabies", "text": "Rabies is a neurotropic (referring to the nuerons) virus, viral zoonotic disease (can spread to humans by animals) that causes acute encephalitis.\nUsually, people (and animals) die from it (it is fatal). There is no cure for it. People who are treated soon after becoming infected have a chance to survive.\nThe disease is transmitted through the saliva and the blood. The usual form of getting it is a bite of a rabid mammal. Pets, like dogs need to be vaccinated against it, in most countries.\nTreatment.\nThere is no cure for Rabies. There is a vaccine (medicine to try to prevent rabies) against it. The vaccine was first developed by Louis Pasteur and Pierre Paul \u00c9mile Roux in 1885. This vaccine used a live virus grown in rabbits, and weakened (through drying it). The first person to be vaccinated was Joseph Meister (a 9-year-old boy who had been bitten by a dog). Vaccines similar to this are still used today, but other vaccines (growing the virus using cell cultures) are more used.\nThere is also a form of treatment that can be done once a person has been bitten. It needs to be done within 6 days of being bitten. There is no way to know whether someone is infected, until it's too late. Treatment starts with washing the wound. This is done to reduce the number of virus particles that enter the body. Often patients are given one dose of immunoglobulin and a certain number of vaccines, over a determined period of time, usually a month."}
{"id": "22252", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22252", "title": "Tirana", "text": "Tirana ( or \"Tirana\") is the capital city of Republic of Albania. It is the largest city in that country. The population of the city is estimated at 353,400 people (2003). Other people think there may be up to 1 million people who live in the city. Tirana was founded in 1614. It became Albania's capital city in 1920."}
{"id": "22253", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22253", "title": "John Forbes Nash Jr.", "text": "John Forbes Nash Jr. (June 13, 1928 \u2013 May 23, 2015) was an American mathematician who worked in game theory and differential geometry. He was born in Bluefield, West Virginia. He shared the 1994 Memorial Prize in Economics with two other game theorists, Reinhard Selten and John Harsanyi.\nEarly life.\nNash was born on June 13, 1928, in Bluefield, West Virginia. He studied at Princeton University and at Carnegie Institute of Technology.\nCareer.\nThe winner of a Westinghouse scholarship, he attended the Carnegie Institute of Technology, where he received both his bachelor's degree and his master's degree in 1948. From Pittsburgh he went to Princeton University where he worked on his equilibrium theory. He received a Ph.D. in 1950 with a dissertation on non-cooperative games. The thesis, which was written under the supervision of Albert W. Tucker, contained the definition and properties of what would later be called the Nash equilibrium. His studies on this subject led to three articles:\nNash also did important work in the area of manifolds (complex spatial structures):\nThis work led to \"Nash embedding theorem\": \"Two real algebraic manifolds are equivalent if and only if they are analytically homeomorphic.\" \nPersonal life.\nHe is best known in popular culture as the subject of the Hollywood movie, \"A Beautiful Mind\", about his mathematical genius and his struggles with schizophrenia, with which he was diagnosed.\nNash married Alicia Lopez-Harrison de Lard\u00e9 in 1957. They had one son. Nash had a first son out of wedlock to Elenor Stier.. In 1963, the couple divorced. They later remarried in 2001. Nash lived in West Windsor Township, New Jersey for a long time.\nDeath.\nOn May 23, 2015, Nash and his wife Alicia were killed in a car accident near Monroe Township, New Jersey. A taxi that they were riding in was struck by another vehicle and the pair was ejected from the taxi. Nash was 86 years old."}
{"id": "22254", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22254", "title": "John Nash", "text": "John Nash may mean"}
{"id": "22255", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22255", "title": "Calisthenics", "text": "Calisthenics is a series of exercises used to develop strength, power and balance or a repeated rhythmical exercise that uses the weight of the body as resistance or the systematic exercises for attaining strength-gracefulness or the practice of calisthenic exercises.\nThe name calisthenics is Greek in origin, a combination of the words 'beauty' and 'strength'.\nCalisthenics is recommended for general good health, light exercises designed to promote general physical fitness."}
{"id": "22257", "revid": "2131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22257", "title": "Protista", "text": ""}
{"id": "22265", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22265", "title": "Muteness", "text": "Muteness means not being able to speak. A person that cannot speak is called a mute. A mute keeps the ability to hear the speech of others. If not, the person would be a deaf mute.\nMuteness is a type of speech disorder. A person who chooses not to speak is said to be \"silent\" rather than mute. Slang for this (British English) is \"keeping mum\".\nOriginally, the common word dumb or \"dumbness\" used to mean \"unable to speak\". Unfortunately this was taken over to mean \"\"unwilling\" to speak\". So people prefer \"muteness\". \"Dumb\" is a much commoner word, and might be used if it would not be misunderstood.\nCause (eteliology).\nIn general, someone who is mute may be mute for one of several different reasons: genetics, psychological, or trauma.\nFor children, a lack of speech may be developmental, neurological, psychological, or due to a physical disability or a communication disorder. \nAdults who previously had speech and then became unable to speak: this may be due to disease, injury, damage or surgery affecting areas of the brain needed for speech. Loss of speech in adults may occur, but rarely, for psychological reasons. Damage (however caused) to the parts of the brain needed for speech is called aphasia.\nAction.\nTreatment or management of muteness depends on what has caused the absence of speech. When there is an absence of speech, a speech assessment is strongly recommended to determine cause and treatment. Treatment of absence of speech is possible in a variety of cases. If the absence of speech is determined to be a permanent condition, a range of assistive and augmentative communication devices are available to aid communication.\nSpeech-generating devices help people with speech deficiencies."}
{"id": "22266", "revid": "793", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22266", "title": "Tonight Show", "text": ""}
{"id": "22271", "revid": "2131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22271", "title": "Broadcast", "text": ""}
{"id": "22275", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22275", "title": "Wooden spoon", "text": "A wooden spoon is a spoon that can be made from wood. Wooden spoons are used for mixing food. Wooden spoon is also a term for last place in a sporting contest."}
{"id": "22277", "revid": "1155980", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22277", "title": "Table tennis", "text": "Table tennis, also known as Ping Pong (a trademarked name), is one of the most popular sports in the world, with players in many countries. It is played by two or four people on a table. To play this game, people use bats and small celluloid balls. You need also a net and a table. Table tennis was invented in England in 1880.\nThe International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF), the worldwide organization, was founded in 1926. Table tennis has been an Olympic sport since 1988.\nMany of the best players in the world today come from China.\nHistory.\nThe sport comes from England during the Victorian era, where it was played by the upper-class as a game to be played after meals. It has been suggested that simpler versions of the game should be developed by British military officers living in India during the 1860s or 1870s, who brought it back with them. A row of books stood up along the center of the table as a net, two more books served as rackets and were used to continuously hit a golf-ball.\nThe name \"ping-pong\" was in wide use before the British manufacturer J. Jaques &amp; Son Ltd coined the term in 1901. The name \"ping-pong\" then came to describe the game played using the rather expensive equipment, Jaques provided, with other manufacturers calling it table tennis. A similar situation arose in the United States, where Jaques sold the rights to the \"ping-pong\" name to Parker Brothers. Parker Brothers then enforced its trademark for the term in the 1920's making the various associations change their names to \"table tennis\" instead of the more common, but trademarked, name.\nThe next most important innovation was by James W. Gibb, a British addict of the sport, who discovered novelty celluloid balls on a trip to the US in 1901 and found them to be ideal for the game. This was followed by E.C. Goode who, in 1901, invented the modern version of the racket by fixing a sheet of rubber to the wooden blade. Table tennis became more popular by 1901, to the extent that tournaments were being organised, books being written on the subject, and an unofficial world championship was held in 1902.\nIn 1921, the Table Tennis Association was founded, and in 1926 renamed the English Table Tennis Association. The International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF) followed in 1926. London hosted the first official World Championships in 1926. In 1933, the United States Table Tennis Association, now called USA Table Tennis, was formed.\nIn the 1930s, Edgar Snow commented in \"Red Star Over China\" that the Communist forces in the Chinese Civil War had a \"passion for the English game of table tennis\" which he found \"bizarre\". On the other hand, the popularity of the sport waned in 1930s Soviet Union, partly because of the promotion of team and military sports, and partly because of a theory that the game had adverse health effects.\nIn the 1950s, paddles that used a rubber sheet combined with an underlying sponge layer changed the game dramatically, introducing greater spin and speed. These were introduced to Britain by sports goods manufacturer S.W. Hancock Ltd. The use of speed glue beginning in the mid 1980s increased the spin and speed even further, resulting in changes to the equipment to \"slow the game down\". Table tennis was introduced as an Olympic sport at the Olympics in 1988."}
{"id": "22278", "revid": "1022418", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22278", "title": "Ping Pong", "text": "Ping Pong may refer to:"}
{"id": "22279", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22279", "title": "Ping pong", "text": ""}
{"id": "22280", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22280", "title": "Table-tennis", "text": ""}
{"id": "22281", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22281", "title": "Nuclear explosive", "text": ""}
{"id": "22282", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22282", "title": "Fireman", "text": ""}
{"id": "22283", "revid": "1628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22283", "title": "Firemen", "text": ""}
{"id": "22314", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22314", "title": "Policeman", "text": ""}
{"id": "22315", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22315", "title": "Policemen", "text": ""}
{"id": "22316", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22316", "title": "Policewoman", "text": ""}
{"id": "22317", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22317", "title": "Policewomen", "text": ""}
{"id": "22320", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22320", "title": "Nayarit", "text": "Nayarit is a middle sized Mexican state. It is on the West coast of Mexico (on the Pacific Ocean shore).\nNative people from Nayarit are called Nayaritas (singular: Nayarita)."}
{"id": "22321", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22321", "title": "Greeks", "text": ""}
{"id": "22322", "revid": "134900", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22322", "title": "Filipino", "text": "Filipino might mean:"}
{"id": "22323", "revid": "729875", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22323", "title": "Mindanao", "text": "Mindanao is one of the three main island groups in the Philippines. It is the southernmost major island of the Philippines, and is the only island in the Philippines to have many Muslim people. Mindanao is northeast of Sabah. It may also refer to the main island in the group. "}
{"id": "22324", "revid": "644977", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22324", "title": "Phylum", "text": "A phylum (plural: phyla) is the third highest rank used in the biological taxonomy of all organisms. The second rank is kingdom and the highest is domain. Usually biologists count about 32 phyla of animals, about 14 of plants, and about 8 phyla of fungus, but definitions vary.\nWith genome analysis, groups of phyla have been put together based on evolutionary relationships. These are informal, not part of the standard classification.\nBotanists usually prefer the word \"division\" instead of \"phylum\"."}
{"id": "22325", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22325", "title": "Knuckles", "text": ""}
{"id": "22326", "revid": "958774", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22326", "title": "Knuckle", "text": "A knuckle, in anatomy, is where two bones join in the hands or feet. When talking about humans, knuckles most often refer to the joints in the fingers.\nAnimal knuckles, such as \"pig knuckles\" are sometimes sold as food."}
{"id": "22327", "revid": "40117", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22327", "title": "The seven wonders of the world", "text": ""}
{"id": "22331", "revid": "2131", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22331", "title": "Goldstar", "text": ""}
{"id": "22332", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22332", "title": "Conduction", "text": "Conduction in physics is about forms of energy, namely heat or electricity.\nBesides conduction, the other major ways of moving energy are by radiation and convection."}
{"id": "22334", "revid": "1122704", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22334", "title": "Royal family", "text": "A royal family is the family of a monarch (king or queen of a country). Or, it is someone who is related to a queen, king or a monarch. Examples of royal families are the British Royal Family, Dutch Royal Family and Thai Royal Family. Many countries have abolished royalty altogether, as in post-revolution France, the United States, Brazil, Portugal, China, Germany, Austria, Russia, Turkey, Ethiopia, Iran, etc."}
{"id": "22335", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22335", "title": "Electronic mail", "text": ""}
{"id": "22337", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22337", "title": "RFC822", "text": ""}
{"id": "22338", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22338", "title": "RFC 2822", "text": ""}
{"id": "22339", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22339", "title": "RFC 822", "text": ""}
{"id": "22340", "revid": "578140", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22340", "title": "General election", "text": "A general election is an election in which all or most members of a given political body are chosen. The term is usually used to mean the elections held for a nation's primary legislative body. This is different from primary elections, by-elections or local elections. In the United Kingdom when Parliament is dissolved every seat in the House of Commons becomes vacant and a general election is held."}
{"id": "22341", "revid": "115351", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22341", "title": "2005 United Kingdom general election", "text": "The 2005 United Kingdom General Election was an election held on May 5, 2005 to elect 646 members to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. The three main candidates to become Prime Minister of the United Kingdom are shown to the right. \nThe election resulted in the Labour Party and it's leader Tony Blair winning a majority in the House of Commons for the third time in a row. The Labour Party did lose 47 of their seats in parliament and the amount of votes they got dropped by 5.5% from the 2001 General Election. Many people believe the Labour Party lost support because of Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair's unpopular decision to send troops to Iraq in 2003.\nResults.\nThe constituencies of Blaenau Gwent and Wyre Forest elected Independent candidates. The seat of Glasgow East was won by the Speaker of the House of Commons Michael Martin, who is not considered to be of any political party.\nThe next election was held on May 6, 2010. See United Kingdom general election, 2010"}
{"id": "22343", "revid": "869768", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22343", "title": "Dover", "text": "Dover can refer to:"}
{"id": "22346", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22346", "title": "Diarrhoea", "text": ""}
{"id": "22350", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22350", "title": "Milenko Stefanovic", "text": "Milenko Stefanovi\u0107 (born February 19, 1930 in Belgrade, Serbia, then the Kingdom of Yugoslavia) is the most famous Serbian classical and jazz clarinet player \u2013 soloist, former Principal Clarinetist of the Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra and Professor at the Josip Slavenski School of Music, University of Pristina and University of the Arts in Belgrade. \nEducation.\nStefanovic began his music study at the age of five. He graduated and completed his postgraduate studies from the Belgrade Conservatory. His major teacher was Professor Bruno Brun, the founder of modern Serbian school of clarinet playing. Additionally, he studied chamber music and orchestral playing in Salzburg, Austria, in the class of Igor Markevich, Erich Leinsdorf and Fernand Oubradous.\nAwards.\nStefanovic was a top-prize winner or finalist in the major Yugoslavian and international competitions, including the competitions in Sarajevo (1952), Skopje (1954), Ljubljana (1956), Moscow (1957), Munich (1957), Geneva (1957) and Prague (1959). Additionally, he was honored with the Award of the Yugoslavian Radio-Television (Ohrid, 1972), awards of the City of Belgrade for the best concert in the previous concert season (1976, 1981, 1986), as well as with 7th July Award (1962), the state\u2019s highest award for the arts. In 2007, upon recommendation of the Expert Committee of the Ministry of Culture, he was awarded Special Acknowledgement for the Highest Contribution to the National Culture of the Republic of Serbia. In 2010 the Association of Musical Artists of Serbia awarded him with The Lifetime Achievement Award. \nPerformance career.\nDuring his long career, Stefanovic performed throughout Europe, Africa and North America. Stefanovic recorded for the leading radio and television stations in the country and abroad: United Kingdom, Italy, France, USSR, Germany, etc. As a soloist, member of various chamber groups and orchestras, he collaborated with distinguished Yugoslavian and international artists, including: Herbert von Karajan, Lorin Maazel, Leopold Stokowski, Kirill Kondrashin, Bernard Keeffe, Oivin Fjeldstad, Francesco Mander, Jerzy Katlewicz, Jovan Sajnovic, Uros Lajovic, Anton Kolar, Anton Nanut, Petr Vronsky, Zbigniew Chwedczuk, Oskar Danon, Dusan Skovran, Josef Daniel, Zivojin Zdravkovic, Julio Maric, Franc Klinar, Roman Skrepek, Aleksandar Pavlovic, Vanco Cavdarski, Bogo Leskovic, Djura Jaksic, Mladen Jagust, Aleksandar Lekovski, Bogdan Babic, Vojislav Simic, Eric Hope, Evgeni Korolyov, Michel Dussault, Andreja Preger, Viktor Jakovcic, Freddy Dosek, Zorica Dimitrijevic-Stosic, Mirjana Krsljanin, The Zagreb Soloists, The Belgrade Trio, The Serbian String Quartet, The Zagreb Quartet and many others. \nHe was one of the few artists honored to perform Copland\u2019s Clarinet Concerto under the baton of Maestro Aaron Copland (1961). \nHe was a long-time principal clarinetist of the Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra (1954-1976). \nStefanovic also played jazz \u2013 as a soloist and member of the Belgrade Jazz Trio and Markicevic Quintet.\nHe has a number of personally dedicated clarinet works by prominent Yugoslavian composers: Dejan Despic, Aleksandar Obradovic, Petar Bergamo, Dusan Radic, Petar Ozgijan, Miodrag Ilic. \nStefanovic was the chair of the committee in numerous Yugoslavian and international competitions. \nCompositions.\nStefanovic wrote numerous jazz compositions and some film music.\nTeaching career.\nHe taught at the Josip Slavenski School of Music, University of Pristina and University of the Arts in Belgrade. His former students hold teaching positions in music schools and universities and play in orchestras in Europe, Asia, Australia and North America. Stefanovic wrote several textbooks for the clarinet students.\nHe served as the Vice-Chancellor and member of the Board of Trustees of the University of the Arts in Belgrade. \nAffiliations.\nStefanovic is an honorary member and former president of the Association of Musical Artists of Serbia. "}
{"id": "22351", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22351", "title": "Drakes", "text": ""}
{"id": "22352", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22352", "title": "Rainfall", "text": ""}
{"id": "22358", "revid": "1039870", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22358", "title": "Flash memory", "text": "Flash memory is a memory storage device for computers and electronics. It is most often used in devices like digital cameras, USB flash drives, and video games. It was developed in the 1980s from the earlier and similar EEPROM.\nFlash memory is different from RAM because RAM is volatile (not permanent). When power is turned off, RAM loses all its data. Flash can keep its data intact with no power at all. A hard drive is also permanent (non-volatile) storage, but it is bulky and fragile. Flash memory is one kind of Non-volatile random-access memory. It is slower than RAM but faster than hard drives. It is often used in small electronics because of its small size and lack of moving parts.\nThe main weakness of flash memory is that it is more expensive than hard drives for the same amount of storage. Another weakness is the number of times that data can be written to it. Data can be read from flash as many times as desired, but after a certain number of \"write\" operations, \"write cycles\", it will stop working. Most flash devices are designed for about 100,000 - 1,000,000 write cycles.\nEEPROM has the same limitation that flash does: ones made in the 20th century could only survive about 100,000 write cycles, later increased to about a million. It is more expensive than flash, so it is rarely used for storage greater than 128kB. The main difference between EEPROM and flash memory is that most EEPROM devices can erase any byte of memory at any time. Flash memory can only erase an entire chunk, or \"sector\", of memory at a time. Both EEPROM and flash are subject to the limitation that only bytes in an 'erased' state can be written, which means that if the user wants to change only one byte of flash, the entire sector must be erased and re-written. This means that flash memory can wear out faster than EEPROM. Some flash memory can store hundreds of gigabytes, or even terabytes. Many are in the form of a pen drive. \nFlash memory is used in USB Drives, solid-state drives, computer RAM (occasionally), hybrid drives (small SSD + hard drive), graphics cards, and memory cards."}
{"id": "22359", "revid": "7687430", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22359", "title": "Bottrop", "text": "Bottrop is a city in west central Germany, on the Rhine-Herne Canal, in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia (Nordrhein-Westfalen). Bottrop is in the Ruhr industrial area, It is next to Essen, Oberhausen, Gladbeck and Dorsten. The city had been a coal-mining and rail center. There are factories producing coal-tar derivatives, chemicals, textiles, and machinery. The population is currently 119,655. Bottrop grew as a mining center beginning in the 1860s and was chartered as a city in 1921. In 1975 it was put together with the unification with the neighbor communities of Gladbeck and Kirchhellen, but Gladbeck left in 1976.\nHistory.\nThe place is first heard of in 1150, as \"Borthorpe\". This name means \"village on the hillside\". In the year 1423, Bottrop is awarded the status of a market town. In 1786 the first cotton mill opens. Coal mining starts in 1856. The city gets town privileges in 1919. In 1953, the population passed 100.000 people for the first time."}
{"id": "22366", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22366", "title": "Puducherry (union territory)", "text": "Puducherry, which used to be called Pondicherry is a Union territory of India. Pondicherry is divided into four separate parts: Puducherry district, Karaikal district, Yanam district , and Mahe district. These four areas are under one name because they were all once ruled by the French. Chandranagore, the fifth former French colony 30 kilometers north of Kolkata, in West Bengal, India, is now outside this unconnected territory. \nWhen India took control of them, they took them in as one territory. Pondicherry is going through a name change to Puducherry, which means \"new village\" in the local language. It covers an area of 183 mi\u00b2 or 474 km\u00b2; it is bigger than Andorra but smaller than Saint Lucia. \nIts a very nice tourist attraction. Its has many heritage buildings with old French architecture. The Boulevard is ellipse-shaped with two clock towers of the Small Market and the Big Market. The area of boulevards close to the Beach is called White Town. This was the area where initial French settlements were made. That's why it is called White town area."}
{"id": "22368", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22368", "title": "New York Yankees", "text": "The New York Yankees are a professional baseball team based in New York City, New York in the Bronx. They compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as part of the American League (AL) east division. They are one of two MLB teams based in New York City, the other being the National League's (NL) New York Mets. They won 27 World Series championships to date, more than any other team in the Major Leagues. From 1923 to 2008, the Yankees home stadium had been Yankee Stadium. Currently, they are playing at their new Yankee Stadium.\nThe word \"Yankee\" (slang for \"American\") and the \"Uncle Sam\" top hat, make up part of what they are all about. As with the more common use of the term \"Yankee\", the team name is more often called \"the Yanks\". Their most commonly used \"unofficial\" nickname is \"the Bronx Bombers\", or simply \"the Bombers\". This nickname was given to them by the press a long time ago. It refers to their ability to hit home runs a lot (a home run is sometimes called a \"bomb\"). A less used nickname is \"the Pinstripers\", for their well-known uniform style.\nThe Yankees currently don't have a team captain. Derek Jeter retired after the 2014 season\nThe Yankees' current team ace is Geritt Cole.\nThe New York Yankees' main rival is the Boston Red Sox.\nThe Yankees' current team manager is Aaron Boone.\nThe Yankees' current General Manager is Brian Cashman.\nThe official fight song for the Yankees is \"Here Come the Yankees\".\nAfter the game, they play Frank Sinatra's \"New York, New York\".\nThey have 18 retired numbers, more than any other teams in MLB. The number 42 was retired not only in the Yankees but also throughout Major League Baseball in honor of Jackie Robinson who broke the color barrier.\nThe Yankees were also the last team to repeat as World Series champions. They won three straight titles from 1998 to 2000.\nFurther Reading.\n\"Pinstripe Pride\" by Marty Appel"}
{"id": "22369", "revid": "1125177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22369", "title": "1048", "text": ""}
{"id": "22370", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22370", "title": "Terry Pratchett", "text": "Sir Terry Pratchett OBE (Terence David John Pratchett; 28 April 1948 \u2013 12 March 2015) was an English author. He was known for his fantasy works, including the famous \"Discworld\" series. His first novel, \"The Carpet People\", was published in 1971. He was the UK's best-selling author of the 1990s. He was born in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, England.\nPratchett died at his home in Broad Chalke, Wiltshire, England on 12 March 2015 from a severe chest infection with final complications from his Alzheimers, aged 66."}
{"id": "22371", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22371", "title": "1218", "text": ""}
{"id": "22372", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22372", "title": "1282", "text": ""}
{"id": "22373", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22373", "title": "Critic", "text": "A critic is a person who reviews things like movies, books, and food to see if they are any good and if other people would like them. They write reviews about what they have seen or read. \nCritics may write about art, music, theatre, politics, movies, television, books, or anything in which good or bad is a matter of personal opinion.\nRoger Ebert, Gene Siskel, Raymond Williams, Susan George, John Ruskin, Rene Ricard, John Amis, Vladimir Vladimirovich Kara-Murza, George Bernard Shaw, Robert Schumann and Pauline Kael are some famous critics of art, music, politics and movies."}
{"id": "22375", "revid": "7658405", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22375", "title": "S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard", "text": "S\u00f8ren Aabye Kierkegaard (5 May 1813 \u2013 11 November 1855), was a 19th-century Danish philosopher and theologian, and is usually thought of as the first existentialist philosopher.\nHe wrote many philosophical books about faith, existence, emotions, and feeling. He disliked people who tried to make Christianity political and people who tried to limit the single individual in favour of groups of many people. Many people have found his works interesting and have said that they were great works of philosophy. Ludwig Wittgenstein, a 20th-century philosopher, thought Kierkegaard was \"by far, the most profound thinker of the nineteenth century\".\nLife.\nHe was born in Copenhagen, Denmark. He attended Copenhagen University and earned his master's degree in 1841. During this time, he met and fell in love with Regine Olsen in 1837. Although they were engaged for a time, Kierkegaard ended the engagement in 1841.\nAfter breaking up with Regine, he spent much of his time writing book after book, in a highly dramatic yet subtle way. He also wrote some of his works using pen names, or pseudonyms. He died in Copenhagen. Although his works were not very popular during his lifetime, after his death they became influential in the 20th century.\nWorks.\nBooks by Kierkegaard. \"Either/Or\" and \"Fear and Trembling\", both published in 1843, are thought to be especially significant."}
{"id": "22384", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22384", "title": "1667", "text": ""}
{"id": "22386", "revid": "598571", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22386", "title": "Despotism", "text": "Despotism is a form of government that is controlled by one person or a small group of people. The person who controls the state is called a \"despot\". The despot has complete control of the state, like a dictator or tyrant. In history, the pharaohs of Egypt were despots. The word \"despot\" is thought to come from the Ancient Greek word \"despotes\", which means \"the master\".\nAccording to Montesquieu, the difference between absolute monarchy and despotism is as follows. In the case of the monarchy, a single person governs with absolute power by fixed and established laws, whereas a despot governs by his or her own will and caprice.\nThe importance of the idea of despotism is that today it is a very common type of dictatorship or direct rule. Ruling monarchies are today few in number.\nEven when there are elections, as there are for the Russian presidency, opposition candidates are at such a disadvantage that they are rarely, if ever, successful.\nDespotism has always been associated with Eastern rather than Western states. Of the former Soviet Union, it is only the new states to the west which have attempted, with difficulties, to build genuine democracies (such as Moldova and Ukraine)."}
{"id": "22387", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22387", "title": "Lakshadweep", "text": "Lakshadweep (; ISO: , formerly known as the Laccadive, Minicoy and Aminidivi Islands (), are a group of islands in the Arabian Sea. They belong to India. Their capital is Kavaratti. It covers an area of . Eleven of the 36 coral atoll islands of Lakshadweep are inhabited. \nThe islands are the only coral atolls in India. The people living there are Malayalam and Mahl people, who have been influenced by Arab traders. Lakshadweep is a Muslim region just like the neighbouring Maldives, where tourism is strictly regulated. Lakshadweep has the largest percentage of Muslims - 98%, even larger percentage than Jammu and Kashmir and is the only Muslim-majority Indian administrative division entirely within India. \nApart from the emerging tourism, government jobs, fishing and coconut production are the mainstays of the Lakshadweep economy."}
{"id": "22388", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22388", "title": "Daman and Diu", "text": "Daman and Diu is a union territory in India. It covers an area of 50 mi\u00b2 or 130 km\u00b2, it is bigger than Saint Helena but smaller than Wallis and Futuna.\nThe territory used to belong to Portugal. "}
{"id": "22401", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22401", "title": "Riding helmet", "text": "A riding helmet, sometimes called a horse riding helmet, is a type of helmet made for people who ride horses. It is important to wear a riding helmet when riding. It is easy for a person to fall off a horse and hit his or her head. Riding helmets keep the rider of a horse from being hurt. Horses can accidentally step on a person who has fallen to the ground.\nHelmets should be worn by all riders, but are most often worn by English style riders."}
{"id": "22402", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22402", "title": "Ketchup", "text": "Ketchup is a kind of thick, liquid sauce. It is made from tomatoes, so it is sometimes called tomato sauce. Usually it is used to add flavour to food. Some people like to eat sausages, burgers, hotdogs or fishsticks with ketchup. Ketchup tastes very unlike the real tomato.\nHistory.\nTomato ketchup.\nAlthough today's ketchup is tomato based, it did not appear until about a century after other types. By 1801, a recipe for tomato ketchup was created by Sandy Addison. It was later printed in an American cookbook, the \"Sugar House Book\". James Mease published another recipe in 1812. In 1824, a ketchup recipe using tomatoes appeared in \"The Virginia Housewife\". This was an important 19th-century cookbook written by Mary Randolph, Thomas Jefferson's cousin.\nAs the century went on, ketchup became more popular in the United States. More Americans began to like tomatoes. Tomato ketchup was sold locally by farmers. A man named Jonas Yerks (or Yerkes) is believed to have been the first man to make tomato ketchup a national phenomenon. By 1837, he had produced and distributed the condiment nationally. Shortly after that, other companies did the same. F. &amp; J. Heinz created their tomato ketchup in 1876. Heinz tomato ketchup was advertised: \"Blessed relief for Mother and the other women in the household!\"\nThe \"Webster's Dictionary\" of 1913 defined \"catchup\" as a \"table sauce made from mushrooms, tomatoes, walnuts, etc. [Written also ketchup].\"\nModern ketchup emerged in the early years of the 20th century. This came from a debate over the use of sodium benzoate as a preservative in condiments. Harvey W. Wiley challenged the safety of benzoate. In response, business owners, particularly Henry J. Heinz, pursued a different recipe that did not use that preservative.\nPrior to Heinz (and his fellow innovators), commercial tomato ketchups of that time were watery and thin. This was due to the use of unripe tomatoes. Those tomatoes were low in pectin. They were less vinegary than modern ketchups. By pickling ripe tomatoes, the need for benzoate was eliminated. There was also no spoiled ketchup or loss in flavor. The changes also helped make it an important American condiment according to some experts.\nUntil Heinz, most commercial ketchups appealed to two of the basic tastes: bitterness and saltiness. But the switch to ripe tomatoes and more tomato solids added a stronger \"umami\" taste. The major increase in the concentration of vinegar added sourness and pungency to the range of sensations experienced while eating it. \nIn the past, ketchup was produced from fresh tomatoes after harvesting. Vacuum evaporation made it possible to turn tomatoes into a very thick tomato paste. This made it easy to store at room temperature. This allows a factory to produce ketchup throughout the year.\nLater innovations.\nIn fast food chains, ketchup is often put in small packets that hold ketchup inside. Users tear the side or top of the packet. They then squeeze the ketchup out of the ketchup packets. In 2010, Heinz is offering an alternate squeeze and dip cup. This is meant to offer a cleaner method of dispensing the product.\nIn an earlier approach, some fast food outlets dispense ketchup from pumps into paper cups. Some restaurants still use this method.\nIn October 2000, Heinz introduced colored ketchup products called EZ Squirt. They included green, purple, pink, orange, teal, and blue colored ketchup. These products were made by adding food coloring to the traditional ketchup. these products have been discontinued.\nStandards and Regulations.\nRegulations in Canada.\nIn Canadian markets, the manufacturing of ketchup is regulated by the Food and Drug Regulation. Ketchup, a heat processed product, must be made from the juice of red-ripe tomatoes or sound tomato trimmings where the skins and seeds have been removed. The ketchup must contain vinegar, salt, seasoning and a sweetening ingredient. They may also contain a class II preservative and food colouring, though not required. \nRegulations in the United States.\nIn the United States, ketchup is regulated and standardized by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Ketchup must be prepared from a tomato concentrate, juice from mature red Lycopersicum esculentum tomatoes or liquid residue from preparing tomatoes for canning or partial juice extractions. The tomato skins, seeds and other hard substances must be strained. Additionally, ketchup must contain any combination of vinegars, nutritive carbohydrate sweeteners, and/or spices, flavouring, onions or garlic."}
{"id": "22409", "revid": "105138", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22409", "title": "Weenie", "text": ""}
{"id": "22410", "revid": "105139", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22410", "title": "Hot dogs", "text": ""}
{"id": "22411", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22411", "title": "Finnish", "text": "Finnish may mean:"}
{"id": "22414", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22414", "title": "Soldiers", "text": ""}
{"id": "22415", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22415", "title": "1718", "text": ""}
{"id": "22416", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22416", "title": "Dadra and Nagar Haveli", "text": "Dadra and Nagar Haveli is a territory in India. It covers an area of 188 mi\u00b2 or 487 km\u00b2, it is bigger than Andorra, but smaller than Saint Lucia."}
{"id": "22417", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22417", "title": "1323", "text": ""}
{"id": "22418", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22418", "title": "Danish", "text": "Danish can mean:"}
{"id": "22419", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22419", "title": "Birthday", "text": "A birthday is the day when a person was born. In many places, on a person's birthday, he or she celebrates with friends and family at a party, where they eat cake or other foods, and get gifts.\nWestern birthdays.\nNot everyone celebrates birthdays, including Jehovah's Witnesses.\nIn many English-speaking countries, people sing the song \"Happy Birthday to You\" to the person celebrating her or his birthday. There are similar songs in other languages.\nA birthday cake is usually decorated and covered with candles. Most of the time, the number of candles is the same as the age of the birthday person.\nComing of age.\nChildren usually reach their age of majority on a birthday.\nAstrology.\nA person's astrological sign is based on his or her birthday.\nSymbolism.\nBirthstones.\nA birthstone symbolizes the month of birth. In 1912, the Jewelers of America agreed on a list of birthstones:"}
{"id": "22420", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22420", "title": "1442", "text": ""}
{"id": "22421", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22421", "title": "Yi I", "text": "Yi I (December 26, 1536\u20131584) was a Korean Confucian scholar. His mother was a famous calligraphist, Shin Saimdang. He was very intelligent as a child, learning to read at three and being very bright at his studies. He was also devoted to his parents: when his mother was sick, he prayed to his ancestors to heal her; and when his father was sick, he cut his own finger with a knife and let his father drink his blood (at that time, people thought human blood was very good medicine)."}
{"id": "22422", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22422", "title": "Yulgok", "text": ""}
{"id": "22423", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22423", "title": "Sunrise (company)", "text": "Sunrise is a Japanese animation company. The staff uses the name Hajime Yatate in all their productions by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, but this is not a real person--it is a name that all the people who work for the studio use for themselves. \nSome cartoons made by the company are:"}
{"id": "22426", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22426", "title": "Confucian", "text": ""}
{"id": "22427", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22427", "title": "Romanian", "text": "Romanian could mean:"}
{"id": "22428", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22428", "title": "Portugeuse", "text": ""}
{"id": "22429", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22429", "title": "Eucaryote", "text": ""}
{"id": "22430", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22430", "title": "Unicellular organisms", "text": ""}
{"id": "22431", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22431", "title": "Multicellular organisms", "text": ""}
{"id": "22432", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22432", "title": "Multicellular", "text": ""}
{"id": "22434", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22434", "title": "X-ray", "text": "X-radiation is a kind of electromagnetic radiation. X-rays are waves of X-radiation. X-rays have a shorter wavelength, and therefore more energy, than ultraviolet radiation. They have a much shorter wavelength than visible light (the light that we can see). Radiation with shorter wavelengths (more energy) than the X-ray is called Gamma radiation (\u03b3-rays). These are all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum.\nThe wavelength of X-rays covers a wide range. Most X-rays have a wavelength in the range of 0.01 to 10 nanometres. This corresponds with frequencies in the range 30 petahertz to 30 exahertz (3\u00d71016 Hz to 3\u00d71019 Hz) and energies in the range 100 eV to 100 keV.\nX-rays can go through many solid materials. For this reason, taking photograms with X-rays is used in medicine in order to see bones and other things inside the body. Sometimes the term \"X-Ray\" means these pictures instead of the radiation that makes them.\nWhat these images show will depend on three things: Rayleigh scattering, Compton scattering and photoabsorption. The images show bone because it is dense enough that X-rays are not able to pass through it. Instead, the X-rays are either absorbed or scattered. The images do not show skin and muscle, however, because these tissues are transparent enough for the X-rays to pass through them without being absorbed too much. To detect tumors, other imaging devices are used; such as magnetic resonance imaging. A computed tomography scanner combines an X-ray machine and computer to construct a three dimensional (3D) picture. This has some ability to see other things besides bone.\nX-rays are made by hitting metal with fast-moving electrons. They are photons, tiny packets of energy that can move atoms and change chemicals in the body. They are ionizing radiation but the things they do depend on the wavelength of the X-rays (or how much energy they have). X-rays with smaller energies (\"soft\" x-rays) cause the photoelectric effect. Mid-level energies cause Compton scattering. High-level energies (\"hard\" X-rays) cause pair production. X-rays used for making pictures of people have low to medium energy. Radiation therapy that treats cancer uses Compton scattering and sometimes Pair production.\nThere are small amounts of X-rays in the air. Like other energy in the air, X-rays can change living cells. Exposing the human body to high doses of X-rays for a long time is dangerous. It can cause cancer. However, cancer cells are hurt more easily, so X-rays are sometimes used to kill them."}
{"id": "22436", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22436", "title": "Computed tomography scanner", "text": "A computed tomography (CT) scanner is an X-ray machine that takes cross section images. They can help a doctor in diagnosis."}
{"id": "22439", "revid": "7750996", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22439", "title": "Hanoi", "text": "Hanoi () is the capital of Vietnam. It is also the second most populated city in the country. In 2004, about 3,083,800 people lived in the city. It has been the capital of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam) since 1945 and the capital of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam (all of Vietnam) since 1976. Before that, it was the capital of the country now called Vietnam for most of the time from at least the 11th century until 1802. The city is on the right of the Red River, and the city's name translates to English as \"inside the river\". Things made there include machine tools, plywood, textiles, chemicals and handicrafts. Hanoi is at 21\u00b02' North, 105\u00b051' East, 1,760\u00a0km north of Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon). Popular tourist sites in the city include Ho Chi Minh's Mausoleum, Hoa Lo Prison, and the Palace of Literature. Nearby Hanoi is also where pho, Vietnamese beef noodle soup, was first created."}
{"id": "22444", "revid": "691370", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22444", "title": "The Chronicles of Narnia", "text": "The Chronicles of Narnia is a series of seven fantasy books, written by British author C. S. Lewis. They have been published since 1954 and have sold over 100 million copies in 41 languages. The books were written by Lewis between 1949 and 1954, they were also illustrated by Pauline Baynes. In 2005, 2008 and 2010, the first three books were made into movies.\nThe seven books.\n\"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\".\nCompleted by the end of March 1949 and published by Geoffrey Bles in London on 16 October 1950, \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" tells the story of four ordinary children: Peter, Susan, Edmund, and Lucy Pevensie, who have been evacuated to the English countryside from London in 1940 following the outbreak of World War II. They discover a wardrobe in Professor Digory Kirke's house that leads to the magical land of Narnia. The Pevensie children help Aslan, a talking lion, save Narnia from the evil White Witch, who has reigned over the land of Narnia for a century of perpetual winter. The children become kings and queens of this new-found land and establish the Golden Age of Narnia, leaving a legacy to be rediscovered in later books.\n\"Prince Caspian\".\nThis book is set 1300 years after \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". Narnia is ruled by the Telmarines, a very mean people. The Pevensie children are called to Narnia by Susan's horn, which is blown by Prince Caspian. There is a big war between the Telmarines and Narnians. At the end of the book, Peter and Susan are told that they will not be able to come back to Narnia. The book was published in 1951.\n\"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\".\nIn the third book, Lucy and Edmund return to Narnia with their cousin, Eustace. They travel on a ship with Caspian, now King of Narnia. They are looking for seven lords who were sent away from Narnia by Caspian's uncle, Miraz. This book was published in 1952.\n\"The Silver Chair\".\nEustace returns to Narnia with Jill, a friend from school. He finds Caspian very old. Aslan tells Jill to find Rillian, Caspian's son, who has been missing for many years. A Marsh-Wiggle named Puddleglum travels with them. This book was published in 1953.\n\"The Horse and His Boy\".\nThis book is set during the rule of the Pevensies. Shasta, is a young boy living in the country of Calormen. He decides to run away when he finds out he is not the son of Arsheesh. He heads north to Narnia with a talking horse, Bree, a Calormene noblewoman, Aravis, and her talking horse, Hwin. It was published in 1954.\n\"The Magician\u2019s Nephew\".\nThis book is set before any of the others. It tells about a boy, Digory, and his friend, Polly. They travel to Narnia through the experiments of Digory's uncle, Andrew. It describes the creation (beginning) of Narnia and the first King and Queen. It also shows the beginning of Jadis, who is called the White Witch in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". The book was published in 1954.\n\"The Last Battle\".\nCompleted in the spring of 1953 and published in 1956,\" The Last Battle\" tells about the end of the world of Narnia. Jill and Eustace return to save Narnia from Shift, an ape, who tricks Puzzle, a donkey, into pretending to be the lion, Aslan. The Pevensie children (without Susan, who has decided that Narnia was just part of a game they played as children), along with their parents and friends, die in a train crash and lived in Narnia forever with Aslan.\nAdaptations.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\" have been made into several movies, TV films, video games, and stage plays.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\" movie series.\nThe first was \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", which was released in 2005, made a world-wide total of $744,783,957. \"Prince Caspian,\" released on May 16 2008, is the second of seven movies to be released by Disney Pictures. Disney also had plans to create the third book in the series: \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader,\" which was released in 2010."}
{"id": "22447", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22447", "title": "Asatru", "text": "Asatru (Icelandic: \u00c1satr\u00fa) is a religion which involves the worship of ancient Germanic spirits and Gods. It got its official legal establishment in the 1970s in Iceland by the efforts of and other Icelanders who had rejected Christianity and had been performing \"Launbl\u00f3t\" (secret offering) to the old pre-Christian Nordic Gods and Goddesses, a practice that has been known in Iceland since \"Kristnitaka\" (Christianization of Iceland). The name comes from two words in a language called Old Norse. It means \"faith in the \u00c6sir.\" The \u00c6sir are the Germanic gods.\nA person who practices Asatru is called an \"Asatrui (pl. Asatruar)\", and is sometimes referred to as a heathen. Sometimes Asatru is also called Wodanism, Wotanism or Germanic paganism.\nCommon books that describe the knowledge in depth include the Sagas and the Eddas.\nGods and Goddesses.\nAsatru is a polytheistic religion in which various goddesses and gods are worshipped. The most prominent are Thor, Odin, Freyja, Frigg, Freyr, Tyr, Loki, and Heimdall. \nFestivals.\nMajor holidays revolve around the changing seasons with Yule being the most important. It is celebrated in late December and continues for twelve days. "}
{"id": "22448", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22448", "title": "Otherkin", "text": "Otherkin are people who believe that part of them is not human inside. They say that, inside themselves, they feel more like another animal than a human. That other animal can be e.g. a wolf, a dragon or an alien. Some otherkin say that they are vampires and are usually acting like them, e.g. by drinking blood.\nOtherkin may also identify as feeling a special connection to other natural elements, i.e. minerals, the likes of fire, water, and wind, plants, etc..\nOtherkin is a neologism\u2014a new word\u2014and it is usually used only by people who say they \"are\" otherkin. The definition can change depending on who uses the word. Some otherkin say that their souls or minds are not human, that they were another species in a past life, or that being not-human is part of their religion. (Otherkin practice many different religions, however.) A few of them say that their physical bodies are not human, either, but there is no proof either for or against that."}
{"id": "22454", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22454", "title": "Pedro Romeiras", "text": "Pedro Romeiras was a Portuguese principal ballet dancer born 3 July 1961, in Lisbon. He was the gold medal winner of the II Prix Fran\u00e7ais de la Danse 1982."}
{"id": "22457", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22457", "title": "3 July", "text": ""}
{"id": "22458", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22458", "title": "\u00c1satr\u00fa", "text": ""}
{"id": "22462", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22462", "title": "Bonfire", "text": "A bonfire or balefire is a large controlled outdoor fire made from bales of straw or wood. The word is believed to come from \"bone fire\". In the time of the Celts, there were midsummer festivals where animal bones were burnt to ward off evil spirits. \nWhat it means in Great Britain.\nIn Great Britain, bonfires are particularly associated with \"Guy Fawkes Night\". This night is also known as \"fireworks night\" or \"bonfire night\". On this night, people celebrate that the Gunpowder Plot was discovered. This discovery took place on 5 November 1605. They do this celebration each year. (It is called an \"annual celebration\".)\nIn Northern Ireland, \"bonfires\" are associated with celebrations on the anniversary of the Battle of the Boyne.\nWhat it means in Japan.\nIn Japan, large fires called bon-bi are set to welcome the return of the spirits of the ancestors. Though the two terms are not etymologically or historically related, they serve similar purposes and indicate the universal importance of large fires.\nUse of bonfires for rituals.\nBonfires were also used for rituals. The idea was that the fire would purify. It was used to consecrate things, or people, that is to make them sacred, in some way. In ancient times, cattle were important symbols of wealth and status. Such cattle were led through the smoke of a bonfire. Couples who were to be wed on May Day would leap through the flames of the bonfire to seal their vows. Coals from a bonfire would be taken home to light the fires in family hearths. This practice was thought to bring good fortune. People also believed that the residents of the Faery realm were incapable of producing fire themselves; embers of bonfires would be carried to the underworld and tended there.\nNeopagan and Wiccan beliefs.\nAlong with the Maypole, the bonfire is an important component of the Wiccan and Neopagan celebration of Beltaine, also known as May Day.\nNine woods are placed into a traditional Wiccan balefire. These woods are rowan, dogwood, elder, poplar, oak, juniper, holly, cedar, and apple. Occasionally, pine is also used instead of holly or elder, as are a handful of other woods. In some regions, superstition, religious belief, or tradition prohibits the cutting of certain trees."}
{"id": "22465", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22465", "title": "Bic Runga", "text": "Bic Runga (born January 13, 1976) is a singer from New Zealand. She was born in Christchurch. She has sold lots of albums in New Zealand.\nThe names of her albums are:"}
{"id": "22474", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22474", "title": "Sputnik programme", "text": "The Sputnik programme was a Soviet Union spacecraft programme. Sputnik 1, the first satellite in the programme, was launched on October 4, 1957. This was the first man-made satellite ever to enter orbit.\nThe United States was very surprised when the Soviet Union sent Sputnik 1 into space. It did not want to fall behind. So, it began spending more money on science and education. This was when the Space Race between the Soviet Union and the United States began.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Sputnik\" comes from the ,\n or , not ."}
{"id": "22476", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22476", "title": "Fatal", "text": ""}
{"id": "22477", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22477", "title": "Deadly", "text": ""}
{"id": "22479", "revid": "7500219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22479", "title": "Carnival", "text": "Carnival is a public festival which takes place in many cities and towns in many countries around the world. It is in February or March each year. Carnival can sometimes last for several weeks. In some places there is only one day of celebration. There are often street parades, bands, costumes and many people wear masks. Carnival is linked to religious traditions in the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches, and it is also linked to local customs.\nBackground.\nLent.\nMany Christian churches have a 40-day \"season\" of fasting called Lent, in which Christians prepare for Easter which is one of the two most important feasts in the Christian year (the other being Christmas). Easter is in late March or April. Lent always begins on a Wednesday, which is called Ash Wednesday in February or March. On that day, many people go to church and have some ash smeared on their forehead as a sign of sorrow for their sins. Then for 40 days, they try to work hard on improving themselves and thinking about the teachings of Jesus. It is usual for people to \"give up\" something for Lent. They might stop smoking or stop watching TV so they can spend more time reading the Bible or talking with the family. Many people give up all their favourite foods and have no cake, wine, beer, chocolate, ice cream or other luxury foods.\nThe name \"carnivale\" comes from Italian and means \"putting aside the flesh\". This means that during Lent people were not to think about their \"flesh\" (their bodies) but do things that were good for their souls. The word \"flesh\"\" also means \"meat\" so many people would eat no meat during Lent.\nMardi Gras.\nMardi Gras means \"Fat Tuesday\". This was the day just before Lent. The first day of Lent was called Mecredi Meagre meaning \"Mean Wednesday\". (\"Mean\" used to mean \"poor\" and \"thin\" rather than \"nasty\".)\nDuring the Middle Ages in Europe, it was normal for people to have a big feast on the Tuesday before the Lenten fast started. In many towns this developed into a big public party, with entertainment in the town square. There is a famous painting by Pieter Bruegel dating from the 1550s and showing the \"Battle of Carnival and Lent\". (See top of page)\nAbout Pieter Bruegel's famous painting.\nIn this picture by Pieter Bruegel, a man representing Carnival is pushed on a barrel by people in costumes and masks. He is about to do battle with Lent. His weapon is a skewer covered with pieces of roast meat. He balances a blackbird pie on his head. Lent, who is very skinny, fights him with two little fish on a bread-board. The person at the front wears a mask and plays a very noisy instrument called a \"rummelpott\".\nModern celebrations of Carnival.\nNowadays many cities and towns around the world celebrate Carnival for a week or more. The final day of the celebration is Mardi Gras, when there is often a parade. In some cities the Mardi Gras parade is held on the weekend before Lent begins, rather than on the Tuesday, so as not to disturb the business and traffic of the town.\nIn some towns such as the Belgian town of Binche the preparations for the Carnival are complex and start many weeks before Carnival takes place, with most of the town's people taking part in some way. The Carnival of Binche is listed with UNESCO as an event of great historic importance because it has been held there in almost the same way for more than 500 years.\nCarnival is celebrated differently around the world, but there are some things that are similar: \nIn the Carnival of Rio de Janeiro, which is one of the biggest and most famous in the world, a major feature is the glamorous costumes as both men and women wear bright colours and wonderful headdresses to dance down the street to the sound of many bands. In Rio there are many very large and expensive decorated \"floats\".\nIn New Orleans the bands are one of the most important parts of the Carnival celebrations. In D\u00fcsseldorf in Germany, one of the features of the Carnival parades are the enormous models of politicians and other well-known people. In Sydney, the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardis Gras which started out as a parade for Sydney's homosexual community, now includes exhibitions, live theatre and competitions, and stretches over two weeks.\nIn Venice the Carnival was celebrated from December 26 until Lent began. During that time, people were allowed to disguise themselves by wearing masks in the street. In the 1930s this was forbidden by the Italian Government, but in 1980 a mask-makers shop was set up in Venice again. Soon the old tradition was brought back, and now many people dress in costume and wear masks for two weeks before Lent begins.\nIn Brussels in Belgium, the main Carnival procession is held in the Grande Place, the town square in front of the Gothic Town Hall with its huge tower. Every part of the procession is ruled by a tradition, but some of the traditions are so old that no-one remembers what they mean anymore. At the beginning of the procession is a large group of people dressed in beautiful costumes of silk and velvet, who act out an historic scene of the coming of the King of Spain and his royal court to Brussels 500 years ago. When they have taken their seats, there comes an amazing procession which includes stilt walkers, fire eaters, Goldilocks with a dancing bear, a mad camel, a wizard, lots of men in huge feathery headdresses, and the Archangel Michael whose job is to frighten the Devil. These characters are traditional to Brussels. In every city, the characters that take part are different.\nUruguay.\nThe country of Uruguay in South America is a fun place to be during Carnival. In Uruguay, Carnival has its own special musical performance.\nDuring February and March, it is summer in Uruguay. Everybody goes into the streets, from old people to children. There are people dancing, singing, and playing a special kind of music. This kind of dance and music is called murga.\nPeople do murga performances in groups. The biggest groups have 17 people. They wear funny clothes with lots of colors. They play the drums and sing. The members of the groups are not professional singers or dancers. They are people with other jobs. Each group prepares and practices their own dance and songs for months. Then, they try to be the best group at the festival. Each group's dance and songs last about 45 minutes. The songs are stories about important people or events in the news, so people think watching murga is like watching a play at the theater.\nUruguay\u2019s Carnival started over 100 years ago. It is the world's longest and is about 40 days long. People still work during that time, but in the evenings and on weekends, they enjoy the festival.\nDifferent uses of the word \"carnival\".\nAlthough the word \"carnival\" still has its old meaning, it is often used to mean public entertainments of different kinds. Some towns have carnivals that have nothing to do with Lent and are at different times of year. Nowadays there are all sorts of different carnivals. Some of these carnivals, like the Notting Hill Carnival in London and the Melbourne Cup Racing Carnival in Australia are very famous.\nThe word \"carnival\" is now used for festivals, parades and competitions of all sorts. There are school sports carnivals, folk carnivals, multi-cultural carnivals, horse racing carnivals, wine and food carnivals and boating carnivals."}
{"id": "22480", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22480", "title": "Fasting", "text": "Fasting is a kind of abstinence. It is when someone does not eat or drink for some specified period of time. It is only the case if the person does so of his or her own will. It may also be that the person only eats and drinks certain kinds of food. Most often, fasting is done for religious reasons. Depending on the tradition, fasting practices may forbid sexual intercourse, (or any sexual desire), masturbation, as well as refraining from eating certain types or groups of food (e.g. meat).\nFasting for religious and spiritual reasons has been a part of human custom since pre-history. It is mentioned in the Qur'an, in the Mahabharata, in the Upanishads, and in the Bible, in both the Old and New Testament. In Buddhism it is also taught as a way to getting Nirvana. \nIn almost all cases, there are exceptions for observing the fasting. These are made for the following groups of people\nPolitics.\nFasting as a form of protest is called a hunger strike.\nIntermittent fasting.\nTimed fasting is known as Intermittent fasting.\nThere are different ways to time your fast. You can:"}
{"id": "22481", "revid": "4743003", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22481", "title": "Walpurgis Night", "text": "Walpurgis Night (\"Valborgsm\u00e4ssoafton\" in Swedish, \"Vappu\" in Finnish, \"Volbri\u00f6\u00f6\" in Estonian, \"Valpur\u0123u nakts\" or \"Valpur\u0123i\" in Latvian, \"Walpurgisnacht\" in German), \"\u010carod\u011bjnice\" in Czech is a holiday celebrated on April 30 or May 1, in Finland, Sweden, Bohemia (Czech Republic), Estonia, Latvia and Germany.\nOrigins.\nThe festival is named after Saint Walburga (known in Scandinavia as \"Valborg\"; alternative forms are \"Walpurgis\", \"Wealdburg\", or \"Valderburger\"), born in Wessex in 710 a niece of Saint Boniface. According to legend, she was a daughter to the Saxon prince St. Richard. Together with her brothers she travelled to W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany where she became a nun and lived in the convent of Heidenheim, which was founded by her brother Wunibald. Walburga died on 25 February 779 and that day still carries her name in the Catholic calendar. However she was not made a saint until 1 May in the same year, and that day carries her name in the Swedish calendar.\nHistorically the Walpurgisnacht is derived from Pagan spring customs, where the arrival of spring was celebrated with bonfires at night. Viking fertility celebrations took place around April 30 and due to Walburga being declared a saint at that time of year, her name became associated with the celebrations. Walburga was worshipped in the same way that Vikings had celebrated spring and as they spread throughout Europe, the two dates became mixed together and created the Walpurgis Night celebration.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, Walpurgisnacht, the night from April 30 to May 1, is the night when allegedly the witches hold a large celebration on the Blocksberg and await the arrival of Spring. When the travel to that mountain is too far, they may also chose another hill in the region they live. \n\"Walpurgis Night (in German folklore) the night of April 30 (May Day's eve), when witches meet on the Brocken mountain and hold revels with their Gods...\" \n\"Brocken the highest of the Harz Mountains of north central Germany. It is noted for the phenomenon of the Brocken spectre and for witches' revels which reputably took place there on Walpurgis night. \nThe Brocken Spectre is a magnified shadow of an observer, typically surrounded by rainbow-like bands, thrown onto a bank of cloud in high mountain areas when the sun is low. The phenomenon was first reported on the Brocken.\" \n\u2014Taken from Oxford Phrase &amp; Fable."}
{"id": "22485", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22485", "title": "Bird flu", "text": "Bird flu (also called avian influenza, avian flu, bird influenza, or grippe of the birds), is an illness caused by a virus. The virus, called \"influenza A\" or \"type A\", usually lives in birds, but sometimes infects mammals, including humans. It is called influenza when it infects humans.\nThere are many types of influenza A, which was first found in a bird in Italy in 1878. Most types have weak symptoms, such as breathing problems, similar to the common cold.\nBut some types kill birds, and a few kill humans and other mammals. One type of bird flu, called \"Spanish flu\", killed 50 to 100 million people in 1918/1920. Another type, called \"Asian Flu\" killed one million in 1957, and another one, called \"Hong Kong Flu\", also killed one million people in 1968.\nA subtype, called \"H5N1\", killed six people in Hong Kong in 1997, but did not kill again until 2003, this time in China. Until the middle of 2005, it was primarily found in southeast Asia but since then has spread to parts of Africa and Europe. It has killed tens of millions of birds and resulted in the slaughter of hundreds of millions of other birds to limit its spread. So far it is mostly a bird disease and rarely infects humans. The concern about H5N1 is that it is constantly evolving at a very fast rate and could create a human flu pandemic that could kill many millions of people. Governments around the world are spending billions of dollars to deal with this problem: studying H5N1, creating vaccines, conducting pandemic practice exercises, stockpiling useful flu medication, and many other important activities. "}
{"id": "22486", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22486", "title": "Carneval", "text": ""}
{"id": "22488", "revid": "248920", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22488", "title": "Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy", "text": "The \"Jyllands-Posten\" Muhammad cartoons controversy is a controversy about a series of cartoons. They were first published in a Danish newspaper. The publication led to an outcry, and sparked violent protests in the Islamic world, with many people dying. The cartoons were drawn and created by Kurt Westergaard.\nThe crisis began after cartoons depicting the Islamic prophet Muhammad were published in the Danish newspaper \"Jyllands-Posten\" on September 30, 2005. Danish Muslim organizations staged protests in response. As the controversy has grown, some or all of the cartoons have been reprinted in newspapers in more than fifty other countries. The protests got worse when fake cartoons were released.\nOne of the cartoons showed Muhammad with a bomb in his turban. Some people thought this was saying that all Muslims are terrorists. But other cartoons made fun of the Jyllands-Posten newspaper. One insulted the editors of the newspaper, by using the language Farsi. \nCritics claims that the cartoons are culturally insulting, Islamophobic, blasphemous, and intended to humiliate a \"marginalized\" minority. However, supporters of the cartoons claim they illustrate an important issue and their publication exercises the right of free speech. They have also claimed that similar cartoons are made relative to other religions, arguing that Islam and its followers have not been targeted in a discriminatory way. "}
{"id": "22489", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22489", "title": "Muhammad cartoons", "text": ""}
{"id": "22490", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22490", "title": "Blasphemy", "text": "Blasphemy is a word that means \"speaking badly about a religion\", or \"insulting a god\". Some religions see blasphemy as a religious crime. Many countries witha state religion have laws that make blasphemy a crime. For example, blasphemy can be punished with the death penalty in Saudi Arabia or Pakistan. In other countries, the punishment for the crime is a fine, or imprisonment.\nSome countries do not have laws against blasphemy. For example, after the French Revolution, France made blasphemy legal to make sure people would have freedom of religion and the freedom of the press.\nThe United States, Canada, and many European countries, have laws to protect people who speak badly about religion. Sometimes people do this in a satirical way, like with a movie that makes fun of a religion. In these countries, profanity is often protected by freedom of speech as well."}
{"id": "22492", "revid": "445729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22492", "title": "1180s", "text": ""}
{"id": "22496", "revid": "7789470", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22496", "title": "Brie", "text": "Brie is a type of soft cheese with a yellowish interior and a white layer (the \"rind\") on the outside of the cheese. The rind is eaten as well as the inside of this cheese. Like other cheeses, Brie is a dairy product made from cows' milk. Brie cheese may be served with fruit as a dessert at the end of a meal, or with a relish.\nThe cheese is sometimes served slightly melted or baked, in a round, lidded ceramic dish, and topped with nuts or fruit, or both.\nHow it is made.\nBrie is a French cheese, and protected by AOC (\"Appellation d'origine contr\u00f4l\u00e9e\"). This means only this cheese from this region (near Paris) can properly call itself \"brie\". This is ignored by some countries outside Europe, but the system of AOC is used in the wine business, so many parts of the world do honour it, and have similar arrangements.\nThe milk of soft cheeses (\"\u00e0 pate molle\" in French) is not heated during the production of the cheese. Talleyrand said about this kind of cheese that it was the \"king of cheeses\". He said that in the 19th century. This kind of cheese has been made for at least 1000 years.\nIn Europe this cheese is usually not treated chemically, so it might change in consistency or color. It will go bad if it is not kept cool. If that means it is kept in a refrigerator, note that it should not be eaten that cold. It is best eaten when it is somewhat below normal room temperature. In most countries, brie-style cheeses are made with Pasteurized milk.\nBrie can be aged, that is, carefully treated for up to a year. Then it has a darker colour and a stronger taste. This is rarely seen outside of France.\nTypes of Brie.\nThe following kinds of Brie exist:\nOther French \"Bries\" are:\nBries from outside France:\nBrie de Meaux.\nCheeses are made into round loaves, of about 36\u00a0cm in diameter. The cheeses then weight about 2.5 kilograms. It is best tasted from April to October, after a ripening period of 8 to 10 weeks. About 2% of the production occurs on farms.\nBrie de Melun.\nThe Brie de Melun is smaller than the Brie de Meaux, but more salt is added to it. The ripening period is 10 weeks. It is best consumed April to September, but it can be found March to November, in some locations. About 5% of production occurs on farms.\nWhat Brie should look like.\nWhen people buy Brie, they should make sure that it has the following traits:"}
{"id": "22497", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22497", "title": "Grippe of the Birds", "text": ""}
{"id": "22498", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22498", "title": "Avian influenza", "text": ""}
{"id": "22499", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22499", "title": "Bird influenza", "text": ""}
{"id": "22500", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22500", "title": "Avian flu", "text": ""}
{"id": "22502", "revid": "7541511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22502", "title": "Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord", "text": "Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord (February 2, 1754 - May 17, 1838) was a French diplomat. \nHe was a bishop and worked successfully for Louis XVI. He changed sides and served the French Revolution and Napoleon I. When Napoleon started losing his wars, Talleyrand changed sides again and served Louis XVIII. He represented France at the Congress of Vienna. He changed sides once more and served Louis Philippe I. Since the beginning of the 19th century he was known simply as \"Talleyrand\". He is widely seen as one of the most pragmatic and influential diplomats in European history. He was known to accept bribes from other European powers, especially while he served under Napoleon."}
{"id": "22503", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22503", "title": "Influenza A", "text": ""}
{"id": "22504", "revid": "2077", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22504", "title": "25 February", "text": ""}
{"id": "22505", "revid": "7215005", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22505", "title": "Pasteurization", "text": "Pasteurization (or pasteurisation) is a process of heat processing a liquid or a food to kill pathogenic bacteria to make the food safe to eat. It involves heating the food to kill most harmful microorganisms. Producers pasteurize dairy and other foods to make them safe to eat. The process is named after Louis Pasteur. He was the first person to learn how to do it successfully. The first pasteurization was done by Louis Pasteur and Claude Bernard on 20 April 1862.\nUnlike sterilization, pasteurization is not intended to kill all microorganisms in the food. Instead, pasteurization gets a \"log reduction\" in the number of microorganisms. It brings their number down so they are unlikely to cause disease if the product is kept in the refrigerator and consumed before its sell-by date. Commercial sterilization of food is not common, because it tends to destroy the flavour of the food.\nMilk pasteurization.\nPasteurization is usually done to milk, which was first suggested by Franz von Soxhlet in 1886. There are two popular ways to pasteurize milk. First, high temperature/short time (HTST), and second, ultra-high temperature (UHT). HTST is the most common method. Milk only labeled \"pasteurized\" (or \"past\") is usually treated with the HTST method, whereas milk labelled \"ultra-pasteurized\" or \"UHT\" must be treated with the UHT method. HTST is when the milk is at a temperature of 72 degrees Celsius (or 161.5 degrees Fahrenheit) for at least 15 seconds. UHT is when the milk is at a temperature of 138\u00a0\u00b0C or 280\u00a0\u00b0F for at least two seconds. \nPasteurization rules are usually set by national food safety agencies (like the USDA in the United States and the Food Standards Agency in the United Kingdom). These agencies say milk has to be HTST pasteurized to have the \"pasteurized\" label. There are different rules for different dairy products, depending on the fat content and what they will be used for. For example, the pasteurization rules for cream are different than the rules for fluid milk, and the standards for pasteurizing cheese are designed to keep the phosphatase enzyme fresh, which helps in making the cheese.\nHTST pasteurized milk normally has a refrigerated shelf life of two or three weeks, but ultra pasteurized milk can last much longer when refrigerated, sometimes two or three months. When UHT pasteurization is mixed with safe handling and container technology, it can even be stored unrefrigerated for even longer periods of time.\nAlternative pasteurization standards and raw milk.\nIn addition to the standard HTST and UHT pasteurization standards, there are other lesser-known pasteurization techniques. The first technique, called \"batch pasteurization\", involves heating large batches of milk to a lower temperature, typically . The other technique is called higher-heat/shorter time (HHST), and it lies somewhere between HTST and UHT in terms of time and temperature. Pasteurization causes some irreversible and some temporary denaturization of the proteins in milk.\nIn most legislations, double pasteurization is not allowed. A heat treatment at a lower temperature or for a shorter time is sometimes performed. Possibly, such milk could be called \"raw milk\" or, confusingly, \"unpasteurized milk\". It cannot be called \"pasteurized\", even though a significant number of pathogens are destroyed during the process.\nIn recent years, there has been some consumer interest in raw milk products, due to perceived health benefits. Advocates of raw milk maintain, correctly, that some components survive in milk that has not been pasteurized. Specifically, raw milk contains immunoglobulins and the enzymes lipase and phosphatase, which are inactivated by heat. Raw milk also contains vitamin B6 of which up to 20% may be lost on heat treatment. It is also claimed to contain beneficial bacteria which aid digestion and boost immunity. \nCommercial distribution of packaged raw milk is not allowed in most US states.\nSome doctors (and some raw milk advocates) acknowledge that certain people should not drink raw milk, including pregnant or breast-feeding mothers, those undergoing immunosuppression treatment for cancer, organ transplant, or autoimmune diseases; and those who are immunocompromised due to medical conditions such as AIDS.\nIn fact, some doctors suggest that babies and breast-feeding mothers avoid all but UHT pasteurized dairy products. \nIn Africa, it is common to boil milk whenever it is harvested. This intense heating greatly changes the flavor of milk, which the people in Africa are accustomed to.\nUnpasteurized milk.\nMilk pasteurization standards have been subject to increasing scrutiny in recent years, due to the discovery of pathogens that are both widespread and heat resistant (able to survive pasteurization in significant numbers). Researchers have developed more sensitive diagnostics, such as real-time PCR and improved culture methods, that have enabled them to identify pathogens in pasteurized milk.\nOne bacterium in particular, the organism \"Mycobacterium avium\" subspecies \"paratuberculosis\" (MAP), which causes Johne's disease in cattle and is suspected of causing at least some Crohn's disease in humans, has been found to survive pasteurization in retail milk in the U.S., the U.K., Greece, and the Czech Republic. The food safety authorities in the U.K. have decided to re-evaluate pasteurization standards in light of the MAP results and other evidence of harmful, pasteurization-resistant pathogens.\nThe USDA (which is responsible for setting pasteurization standards in the U.S.) has not re-evaluated their position on pasteurization adequacy. They do not dispute the studies, which are at this point accepted by the scientific community, but maintain that the presence of MAP in retail pasteurized milk must be due to post-pasteurization contamination. However, some researchers within the FDA, which is responsible for food safety in the U.S., have begun pushing for a re-evaluation of these results. There is a small but growing body of criticism directed at these agencies by Crohn's disease sufferers, scientists, and doctors. Some have suggested that the U.S. dairy industry has been successful in suppressing the agencies' response to a potential health crisis, for fear of consumer panic which would lead to a decrease in milk consumption. It is worth noting that while MAP has not been definitely proven to be harmful in humans, all other mycobacteria are pathogenic, and it has been definitively shown to cause disease in cattle and other ruminants.\nA newer method called flash pasteurization involves shorter exposure to higher temperatures, and is claimed to be better for preserving color and taste in some products.\nThe term cold pasteurization is used sometimes for the use of ionizing radiation (see food irradiation) or other means (e.g. chemical) to kill bacteria in food. Food irradiation is also sometimes called \"electronic pasteurization\"."}
{"id": "22507", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22507", "title": "Pasteurisation", "text": ""}
{"id": "22508", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22508", "title": "Walpuris Night", "text": ""}
{"id": "22510", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22510", "title": "Soft cheese", "text": "Soft cheese (in French: \"Fromage \u00e0 pate molle\") is any kind of cheese that does not get heated during production.\nAn example of soft cheese would be Brie."}
{"id": "22511", "revid": "558886", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22511", "title": "Cult", "text": "A cult is a group of people who have a religion or a set of beliefs. In modern times the term \"cult\" usually does not mean a mainstream religion, but a group set up \"in opposition to a centre of established authority\". New Age religions were often called cults because they were thought to be deviant social movements.\nThe word cult originally meant a system of ritual practices. It was first used in the early 17th century to mean homage paid to a divinity. It came from an ancient Latin word \"cultus\" meaning \"worship\".\nA cult is often a small, newly started religious movement. Cults have beliefs or practices that many people think of as being odd, or that have practices that most people in the world do not practice. More than that, cults have often been led by people who are not elected, and control the group according to their own wishes. Some cult leaders have been dangerous criminals (Charles Manson; Peoples Temple) or even lunatics. Killings and mass suicides have occurred in cults (Order of the Solar Temple; Heaven's Gate). Of course, a \"suicide\" enforced by armed guards carrying sub-machine guns (Peoples Temple; Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God) is not a simple suicide as generally understood. It is at least an assisted and coerced suicide.\nWhether a religious group is or is not a cult can be a hard question to answer. What is at one point in time considered a cult may later be accepted as a religion and what at one point of time is considered an accepted religion may later become a cult.\nTreatment of cult members.\nMind control.\nSome form of persuasion or mind control can be used to recruit and maintain members. The objective is to prevent the faithful from thinking critically, and making choices in their own best interest. \nThe following methods have been used in some or all cults studied:\nThis view is disputed by some. \"Society for the Scientific Study of Religion\" stated in 1990 that there was not sufficient research for a consensus, and that \"one should not automatically equate the techniques involved in the process of physical coercion and control with those of nonphysical coercion and control\".\nManagement style of cults.\nAn oft-repeated criticism of cults is that their management style is dictatorial and exploitative. The following is one example:\nUse of violence.\nOwnership of weapons and violence has occurred in some cults. The Branch Davidians under the direction of David Koresh used violence against Federal agencies, with tragic results for both sides. The later FBI report reveals the extent of their arms stockpile.\nThe People's Temple included guards armed with submachine guns. These guards killed the visiting U.S. Congressman Ryan, and stood around the believers as they committed suicide. Members of the Manson Family were convicted of several murders."}
{"id": "22512", "revid": "827189", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22512", "title": "The Cult", "text": "The Cult are a English rock band. They formed in 1982 under the name Death Cult and later renamed to Southern Death Cult in 1983, then was again renamed to their current name The Cult."}
{"id": "22513", "revid": "1125177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22513", "title": "1028", "text": "1028 (MXXVIII) was a common year when the Julian calendar was used. It was the twenty-eighth year of the 2nd millennium and the 11th century."}
{"id": "22514", "revid": "1125177", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22514", "title": "1056", "text": ""}
{"id": "22516", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22516", "title": "James A. Michener", "text": "James Albert Michener ( or ; February 3, 1907 \u2013 October 16, 1997) was an American writer. His books include \"Tales of the South Pacific\", \"Hawaii\", \"The Drifters\", \"Texas\", and \"Poland\". Most of his 40 books are very large sagas. They are about the lives of many generations in a particular place. His non-fiction writings include the 1992 book \"The World is My Home\" and \"Sports in America\".\nMichener wrote that he did not know who his parents were or exactly when and where he was born. He was raised by an adoptive mother, Mabel Michener, in Doylestown, Pennsylvania. Some have argued that Mabel was his birth mother. He graduated from Swarthmore College, where he played basketball, in 1929. He later studied at the Colorado State Teachers College. He taught there for several years. He also taught at Harvard University. \nHis writing career began during World War II. He was assigned to the South Pacific Ocean as a naval historian. He used his time there as the basis for \"Tales of the South Pacific\", his first book. This book was the basis for the musical \"South Pacific\".\nMichener met his wife Mari while in Japan. His novel \"Sayonara\" is autobiographical.\nOn January 10, 1977, he was given the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Gerald R. Ford.\nIn his final years, he lived in Austin, Texas, where he died of kidney failure on October 16, 1997 at the age of 90."}
{"id": "22517", "revid": "445729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22517", "title": "1150s", "text": ""}
{"id": "22519", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22519", "title": "War of 1812", "text": "The War of 1812 was fought between the British Empire and the United States from 1812 to 1815 on land in North America and at sea. The British forces were helped by Canadian militia (volunteers) and Native Americans because British soldiers were busy fighting Napoleon I in Europe.\nIn nearly every battle, the British defeated the attacking American forces. The war increased nationalism in both Canada and the United States.\nCauses.\nOne reason given by Americans for declaring war was that the British were bothering American ships. The British claimed to be looking for British sailors who had deserted. Many British sailors deserted from the\nmiserable conditions and the harsh discipline. Originally, many of the sailors had been pressed into service. It was the practice of the British to arrest any man they found on a street and to force him to serve on their ships. Many British sailors who escaped signed on as crew aboard American merchant ships. The British claim was somewhat true.\nIn 1807, an American ship was boarded and then fired on, which created outrage among the American public. The British were also seizing American sailors at sea and forcing them to serve in the navy.\nThe numbers of American seamen pressed into British service is not well known and may have been greatly exaggerated. The British were also sponsoring Native American territories in the Midwest to stop the United States from expanding westward. That made 10,000 Native Americans fight for the British.\nNapoleon I started the\u00a0French invasion of Russia\u00a0in\u00a01812,\u00a0just as the\u00a0war started in North America. The Americans thought that the British would be busy fighting the French during the Napoleonic Wars to do much in North America. \nThe war.\nFighting began when the United States started to attack the Canadian provinces in 1812. However, the British and the Canadians successfully defended their borders. In 1813, British and American ships fought in the Battle of Lake Erie. Americans under Oliver Hazard Perry won, which gave them control of Lake Erie. American forces raided and burned Toronto, which was then called York.\nIn 1814, Napoleon I abdicated the French throne. That freed up experienced British troops to be sent to North America. They burned the unfinished Washington, DC, and also attacked Baltimore. An American lawyer, Francis Scott Key, wrote a poem about the Battle of Baltimore. The poem was later used to give the words to a song that later became the US national anthem: \"The Star Spangled Banner.\" The war ended in 1815. The British attacked New Orleans but were stopped by the Americans under General Andrew Jackson.\nUnknown by both sides, a peace treaty had already been signed.\nPeace.\nThe two countries signed the Treaty of Ghent to end the war, on December 24, 1814 in Belgium. Fighting continued into January 1815 because the forces did not know about the treaty, but no great changes took place afterward. The British stopped impressing sailors because the Napoleonic Wars had been finished.\nMost Americans heard of the victory in the Battle of New Orleans before they heard of the treaty. The Federalist Party, which had opposed the war, became disliked as pro-British and soon disappeared.\nWinner.\nFrom the British perspective, the War of 1812 was a minor sideshow. The Americans called it their victorious \"Second War for Independence\". The British remembered it as the Americans trying to take advantage of their being involved in a war against the French Empire and paid no attention to American grievances.\nIn Canada, the War of 1812 was an unwanted war. It concerned the distant capitals of Washington, DC, and London, not them. In Lower Canada, now Quebec, it was considered an Anglo-Saxon war. In Quebec there was little love for the British, but the British had guaranteed their right to speak French. Since they did not know what would happen if the Americans took over, they chose the lesser evil and supported the British.\nUpper Canada (later part of the Province of Ontario) had been settled by American Loyalists who fled after the Revolutionary War. They had little love of their former countrymen in the US but had become outnumbered by Americans who later came north to settle. When the Americans attempted to invade Canada, the Canadian militias were eager to defend their homeland.\nIn US history, the War of 1812 is the most obscure conflict. The average American remembers very little about the war. Some may remember The Star Spangled Banner, the Burning of Washington, or the Battle of New Orleans. Otherwise, it is a little-understood conflict. The issues are complex. Most scholars would agree it was fought over maritime issues. Since the British Navy was then the most powerful in the world, it was easier to attack the British on land by invading Canada. Former US President Thomas Jefferson predicted the \"acquisition of Canada, will be a mere matter of marching.\"\nBritish who knew about the little war felt that they had won, no matter what Americans thought. Canadians kept their independence from the US and so felt that they had won. The Americans felt they won although they lost in Canada since they lost none of their territory, repelled the invasion of Maryland, were free to fight the Indians without British interference, and were no longer impressed on the high seas. Of all three, the British are perhaps the happiest because they have completely forgotten about the war."}
{"id": "22521", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22521", "title": "Chandigarh", "text": "Chandigarh, also called \"The Beautiful City\", is a city in India. It is a union territory, because it is the capital of two states: Punjab and Haryana. As a territory it does not belong to either state. Before 1 november,1966 it was capital of Punjab, but after formation of Haryana on 1 November, 1966 it become a union territory.There are many tourism places in Chandigarh like Rock garden, Rose garden and Sukhna lake.\nChandigarh came into existence in 1952 when its first stone was laid. It is one of the modern cities of India, designed by a French architect Le Carbusier. It was the dream city of India's first Prime Minister, Sh.Jawahar Lal Nehru.\nIt is well known for its mixed cultural background and its fast development in the field of Information Technology. It has outlets of many famous multinational companies established here and is emerging as a hub for business development. The territory covers an area of 44 mi\u00b2 or 114 km\u00b2, it is bigger than Montserrat but smaller than Jersey. It's also the proposed capital of Khalistan."}
{"id": "22522", "revid": "780211", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22522", "title": "Convection", "text": "Convection is the movement of heat because of the movement of warm matter.\nFor example, atmospheric circulation moves warm air to cool places, causing wind. Wind, in turn, can enter and cool a room if the window is open. The movement of the clouds, the ocean currents and many types of heaters are examples of convection.\nForced convection and natural convection.\nConvection can happen naturally (\"natural convection\") or because of a moving device (\"forced convection\").\nThe fan is a device that produces the movement of the air artificially. The air in this case is moving because of the rotation of the fan. This is an example of \"forced convection\".\nNatural convection happens because a fluid is lighter if is hot and it is heavier if is cold, so if a fluid has a hot part and a cold part, the hot part will naturally move upward and the cold part naturally moves downward. For example, if the water in a pot is hotter near the bottom because of the fire, it moves from the bottom to the surface. At the same time the water near the surface is colder so it moves to the bottom.\nConvection currents.\nConvection currents occur when there are significant differences in temperature between two parts of a fluid. When this happens, hot fluids rise and cold fluids sink. This causes movements or currents in the fluid. Atmospheric circulation, for example, is made by convection currents."}
{"id": "22531", "revid": "801958", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22531", "title": "Chipmunk", "text": "A chipmunk is a small squirrel-like rodent. It is in the Sciuridae family. About twenty-three species fall under this title, with one species in North America.\nThe name may have originally been spelled \"chitmunk\" (perhaps from a Native American word meaning \"red squirrel\"). However, the earliest form comes from the Oxford English Dictionary (in 1842) as \"chipmonk\". Other early forms include \"chipmuck\" and \"chipminck\". \nChipmunks are hoarders, meaning they store food for winter.\nPopular culture.\nChip 'n Dale, two Disney cartoon characters, are famous chipmunks in pop culture. Another such trio is Alvin, Simon and Theodore (created by Ross Bagdasarian)."}
{"id": "22532", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22532", "title": "Chipmonk", "text": ""}
{"id": "22535", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22535", "title": "Vicente Mond\u00e9jar Piccio", "text": "Major General Vicente Mond\u00e9jar Piccio (1 March 1927 \u2013 28 April 2015) was a Filipino soldier. He was Chief of the Philippine Air Force during the last years of the dictatorship of Marcos, notably during the 1986 People Power Revolution."}
{"id": "22536", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22536", "title": "General Piccio", "text": ""}
{"id": "22537", "revid": "40158", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22537", "title": "Vicente Piccio", "text": ""}
{"id": "22538", "revid": "380105", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22538", "title": "Piccio", "text": "The Piccio family is a family of Portuguese Jewish origin. The family's name is an Italianisation of the original Portuguese Figo."}
{"id": "22541", "revid": "414535", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22541", "title": "1143", "text": ""}
{"id": "22542", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22542", "title": "Donald Duck", "text": "Donald Duck is a cartoon character created by Walt Disney. He is a white duck with an yellowish-orange bill and legs. He usually wears a sailor cap, a blue sailor shirt and a black or red bow tie. He first appeared on-screen in \"The Wise Little Hen\" on 9 June 1934. Donald is Scrooge McDuck's nephew. His girlfriend is Daisy Duck. His nephews are Huey, Dewey and Louie. Donald appeared in animated shorts, comic books, and newspaper comic strips. Donald Duck appears frequently in \"The Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\".\nDonald Duck is the third most popular cartoon character of all time, after Mickey Mouse and Bugs Bunny. Donald Duck has had a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame since 2004."}
{"id": "22543", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22543", "title": "1717", "text": ""}
{"id": "22544", "revid": "1116621", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22544", "title": "Montevideo", "text": "Montevideo is the capital and the largest city in Uruguay. It was founded by the Portuguese in 1717. Its best neighbourhood is called Carrasco. This neighbourhood is very exclusive due to its architectural styles."}
{"id": "22548", "revid": "54777", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22548", "title": "Book of Esther", "text": "Esther is the name of a book in the Tanakh (the Hebrew Bible) and the Old Testament, and also its title heroine. It is the basis for the Jewish celebration Purim.\nAuthor and Date.\nAlthough it is never said who wrote the book of Esther, from inside evidence it is possible to make some guesses about the author and when it was written. The author was a Jew, because he emphasizes where the Jewish festival came from and from the Jewish nationalism inside the story. The author probably lived in a Persian city, because he knew Persian customs well, and does not say anything about the land of Judah or Jerusalem. The earliest date of the book would be a little while after the events were told, for instance, about 460 B.C. (before Ezra's return to Jerusalem). It is also thought that the festival of Purim had been celebrated some time before this book was written.\nPurpose, Themes, and Features.\nPurpose.\nThe author's main purpose was to write about how the yearly festival of Purim started and to make people remember the saving of the Jewish people during King Xerxes' reign. The book shows both the start of the festival and why it should continue to be celebrated.\nThemes.\nIn the book, the author repeatedly talks about the conflict between Israel and the Amalekites, a conflict that began during the exodus and continued through Israel's history. The author of Esther views them as the symbol of all the powers of the world against God's people. Now that Israel has been released from captivity, Haman's dangerous edict is the final try in the Old Testament time to get rid of them. When Haman is defeated, Israel enjoys a time of rest.\nFeasting is another important theme in Esther, as seen in the picture on the left. Banquets are the setting for important parts of the story. There are ten banquets.\nStyle and Features.\nRepetition is one of the main stylistic features of the book of Esther. The three groups of banquets come in pairs; there are two lists of the king's servants; two reports that Esther hid her identity; two gatherings of women; two houses for the women; two fasts; two talks by Haman with his wife and friends; two sudden visits to the king by Esther; two coverings of Haman's face; two royal commands; two cool-downs of the king's anger; two days for the Jews to protect themselves and take vengeance; and two letters about how Purim started.\nAnother important feature of this book that has often been wondered about is that it never directly talks about God, worship, prayer, or sacrifice. This has made some people think the book is not as religious as other books. However, it is possible that the author purposefully did not say anything about God or anything religious to show more clearly that it is God who controls all the \"unimportant\" coincidences that are in the story and ends in saving the Jews.\nContent.\nThe Book of Esther is about a Jewish girl adopted by her uncle, Mordecai, after her parents died. \nThe Persian King Xerxes kicked out his wife, Queen Vashti, after she refused his demand, and fell in love with Esther at a beauty contest. He took Esther as the new Persian queen, not knowing she was an Israelite.\nHaman, Xerxes' prime minister, developed a grudge against Mordecai because he would not bow down to him, but only to the God of Israel. He despised Mordecai because he was a Jew, and tried to trick the king into making a law to kill all Jews. Haman was unaware that Queen Esther herself was a Jew.\nQueen Esther discovered the plot by Haman and worked to stop it. She invited the king to dine with Haman present so she could tell him about the plot. But her courage failed her and she said nothing. \nShe again invited King Xerxes and Haman to dine and this time she told the king of Haman's plot. The king, furious, stormed out and Haman begged Esther for mercy. When the king returned, he mistakenly believed Haman had molested his queen, and had him hanged on the same gallows that Haman had prepared for Mordecai. In the end, thanks to Esther's courage and influence, the king changed the law and saved the Jewish people. "}
{"id": "22550", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22550", "title": "Clay", "text": "Clay is a fine-grained silicate mineral made when rocks break down. Wet clay is soft and can be shaped to make pottery, bricks and other things. When it is shaped and then fired in a kiln to make it hard, it becomes pottery.\nClay often contains some water because the water molecules stick to the tiny grains. There may also be some organic materials in the clay.\nThere are 35 recognized clay mineral species on Earth, they make muds stick together ('cohesive'), or able to flow ('plastic'). The thixotropy of clay sometimes causes landslides.\nQuartz, feldspars, iron oxides, and carbonates can weather to sizes of a typical clay mineral. The formation of clay is well understood. It can come from soil, volcanic ash, and glaciation. Ancient mudrocks are another source, because they weather and disintegrate easily.\nClay is by far the smallest particles recognized in mudrocks. A clay particle is about 1/1000th the width of a sand grain. This means a clay particle will travel 1000 times further at constant water velocity, thus requiring quieter conditions for settlement. Where the grains are more than a few millimeters wide, the material is called silt, not clay."}
{"id": "22554", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22554", "title": "Rifle", "text": "The rifle is a gun with a stock to brace against the shoulder and a barrel with twisting grooves. The grooves are called rifling and make bullets spin as they fly through the air. Rifles are made to shoot many different sizes of bullets using different amounts of gunpowder. Rifles are usually made to be able to hit targets at long ranges. Modern rifles are made for many different purposes. Some are made for hunting animals. Some are made for soldiers to use in war. Others are made for police to have in case they need them. Some rifles are made for target shooting. \nTypes.\nRifles can work in different ways. Some rifles have what is called a bolt action. A small handle is used to move a part of the rifle called a \"bolt\". By moving the bolt backward, then forward, allows the shooter put a bullet in the chamber ready for firing. It also ejects any spent shells still in the chamber from any previously fired rounds. The rifle in the picture above is a bolt action. Some rifles are semi-automatics, where a bullet is loaded (automatically) and fired each time the trigger is pulled. Some are fully automatic, which work like semi-automatics but allow the shooter to fire more than one bullet at a time by holding down the trigger. The automatic rifle stops firing when the trigger is released or it runs out of ammunition."}
{"id": "22555", "revid": "5296", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22555", "title": "Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands", "text": ""}
{"id": "22556", "revid": "5738", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22556", "title": "Nazism and homosexuality", "text": ""}
{"id": "22564", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22564", "title": "1748", "text": ""}
{"id": "22565", "revid": "1153703", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22565", "title": "Deuterocanonical books", "text": "Deuterocanonical books means \"second canon\" in Greek. It usually means the parts of the Bible that are only used by some Christian churches (mostly Roman Catholic and Orthodox). The books only exist in Greek language manuscripts that were written by the Jewish people living in Greek speaking areas of the Mediterranean Sea between 250 and 50 BC, as were all of the books of the Old Testament. It was not until circa 900 AD that the Old Testament as known in Jewish and Protestant religions was written in Hebrew and limited to the current so-called \"canons\".\nThe books are not part of the Jewish Tanakh (also called the \"Hebrew Bible\"), although they were quoted as Scripture well into the Middle Ages as is found in the Jewish Mishna and later Rabbinical writings, even into the 6th century AD. The current Jewish canon was closed by the time of the Masoretic Text in the 10th century AD. \nSome books considered deuterocanonical by Catholics are:\nThe \"Book of Daniel\" and the \"Book of Esther\" are longer in Catholic Bibles than in Protestant Bibles because they have more stories.\nMany, but not all Protestant churches do not accept these books as inspired by God and use the derogatory term for them: Apocrypha. Martin Luther considered these books good to read while John Calvin read and studied them but did not think they should be part of the Bible. The Catholic Church, the Orthodox Church, "}
{"id": "22569", "revid": "38711", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22569", "title": "Words", "text": ""}
{"id": "22570", "revid": "6887313", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22570", "title": "Sidekick", "text": "A sidekick is someone who regularly travels with, and helps, another person. In fiction, the other person is often a crimefighter or superhero, such as Batman and his sidekick Robin. Some people consider Sancho Panza, Don Quixote's ever-faithful companion, to be a type of sidekick, even though the book was written long before the word sidekick was invented. Annabeth Chase is nobody's sidekick."}
{"id": "22572", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22572", "title": "Jurist", "text": "A jurist (from medieval Latin) is someone who researches and studies jurisprudence (theory of law)."}
{"id": "22573", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22573", "title": "Nicobar Islands", "text": "The Nicobar Islands are an island chain in the eastern Indian Ocean. They are part of India.\nThe Nicobar islands include 22 islands of different sizes. The largest one is Great Nicobar. The total land area of the chain is 1841\u00a0km\u00b2. The highest point on the Nicobars is Mount Thullier at 642 m. The population of the islands was 42,026 in 2001, roughly 65% of whom are indigenous peoples (the Nicobarese and Shompen peoples, listed among the Scheduled Tribes of India), and 35% migrants from India and Sri Lanka.\nThe Nicobars are located southeast of the Indian subcontinent.They are separated form the subcontinent by the Bay of Bengal by about 1,300\u00a0km and are separated from the Andaman Islands to the north by the 150\u00a0km wide Ten Degree Channel and are 189\u00a0km from the Indonesian island of Sumatra to the southeast. The Andaman and Nicobar islands separate the Bay of Bengal from the Andaman Sea. Until the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, Indira Point, south of Great Nicobar, was the southernmost point in India.\nThe islands cluster into three groups. The northern group includes Car Nicobar (127\u00a0km\u00b2) and uninhabited Batti Malv (2\u00a0km\u00b2). The central group includes Chowra (8\u00a0km\u00b2), Teressa (101\u00a0km\u00b2), Poahat (13.3\u00a0km\u00b2), Katchal (174\u00a0km\u00b2), Camorta (188\u00a0km\u00b2), Nancowry (67\u00a0km\u00b2), and Trinket (86\u00a0km\u00b2); the Isle of Man and Tillangchong (17\u00a0km\u00b2) are uninhabited. Tillangchong is a wildlife sanctuary. The southern group includes Great Nicobar (1045\u00a0km\u00b2), Little Nicobar (157\u00a0km\u00b2), Kondul (4\u00a0km\u00b2) and Pulomilo (1\u00a0km\u00b2); the islets of Meroe, Trak, Treis, Menchal, Cubra, Pigeon, and Megapod are uninhabited. Megapod is a wildlife sanctuary.\nAdministratively the Islands are part of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a Union territory of India. The capital of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands territory is Port Blair on South Andaman. The Union Territory is divided into two districts, Andaman district and Nicobar district (the latter encompassing all of the Nicobars). The Indian Government presently restricts access to the Nicobars by special permit, and in general non-Indian citizens are forbidden from visiting the Nicobar Islands."}
{"id": "22574", "revid": "904753", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22574", "title": "Andaman and Nicobar Islands", "text": "The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are a union territory of India. The name is often shortened to A &amp; N Islands, or ANI.\nThe islands are in the Indian Ocean, in the southern part of the Bay of Bengal. The capital of this territory is the Andamanese town of Port Blair.\nIt is made of two island groups - the Andaman Islands and the Nicobar Islands - separating the Andaman Sea to the east, from the Indian Ocean. These two groups are separated by the 10\u00b0 N parallel, the Andamans lying to the north of this latitude, and the Nicobars to the south. The channel that separates ANI is the 10\u00b0 degree channel. This islands have the only active volcano in India, Barren Island. These islands are also uninhabitated. It also has the lowest point in India, The Indira Point\nThe territory's population in the last (2001) census of India was 356,152. Added together, the total land area of the territory is around 6,496 km\u00b2 or 2,508 mi\u00b2, it is larger than the Palestinian territories but smaller than Georgia territory of Abkhazia."}
{"id": "22576", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22576", "title": "A &amp; N Islands", "text": ""}
