{"id": "3038", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3038", "title": "Plymouth Argyle F.C.", "text": "Plymouth Argyle Football Club, is an English football club. The club is nicknamed \"The Pilgrims\". The team usually plays in green, white and black.\nClub Information.\nThe club is called \"The Pilgrims\" because the people that left Plymouth for America were the first people to be called Pilgrims. The ship on the badge is called The Mayflower. The first pilgrims travelled on the Mayflower.\nThe club's stadium is called Home Park. It was ruined by German aeroplanes in World War II. Home Park was repaired after the war. In 2001 and 2002, Home Park was made into a better stadium. Some parts of the stadium were not used while the work was being done. The stadium is now fully open.\nThe club was made in 1886, but it was called Argyle Athletic Club. The club changed its name to Plymouth Argyle Football Club in 1903.\nPlymouth Argyle has never won a match by more than 7 goals. They have beaten Hartlepool United and Millwall 8-1. On 3 January 2004, they beat Chesterfield 7-0. The club lost 9-0 to Stoke City in 1960. Luke McCormick is a goalkeeper. He played seven games in a row for Plymouth Argyle without letting the other teams score a single goal.\nIn the 1990s, Peter Shilton, Neil Warnock, and John Gregory all managed the club.\nThe club won Division Three in 2001/02, won Division Two in 2003/04 and now plays in the newly named Championship, the second tier of English football. When the club won Division Three they scored 102 points. No other team had ever scored that many points.\n100th season.\n2003/04 is the club`s 100th season since becoming Plymouth Argyle in 1903. The club has set up many events, while the team has won many awards.\n\"A list of things that happened in the 2003/04 season:\"\nClub Honours.\nThird Division South\nThird Division (Old Format)\nDivision Three\nDivision Two\nCurrent Plymouth Argyle Squad.\n1 Romain Larrieu Goalkeeper (on loan to Gillingham)\n2 Anthony Barness Defender\n4 Lilian Nalis Midfielder\n5 Kriszti\u00e1n Tim\u00e1r Defender (on loan from Ferencvaros)\n6 Hasney Aljofree Defender (on loan to Oldham)\n7 David Norris Midfielder\n8 \u00c1kos Buzs\u00e1ky Midfielder\n9 Sylvan Ebanks-Blake Midfielder\n10 Barry Hayles Striker\n11 Nick Chadwick Striker\n13 Mathias Doumbe Defender\n14 Tony Capaldi Midfielder\n15 Paul Wotton Midfielder\n16 P\u00e9ter Halmosi Midfielder (on loan from Debrecen)\n17 Kevin Gallen Striker (on loan from QPR)\n18 Gary Sawyer Defender\n19 Marcel Seip Defender\n20 Lee Hodges Midfielder\n21 Cherno Samba Striker\n22 Paul Connolly Defender\n23 Luke McCormick Goalkeeper\n24 Josh Clapham Goalkeeper\n25 Ryan Dickson Midfielder (on loan to Torquay)\n26 Scott Sinclair Midfielder (on loan from Chelsea)\n27 Reuben Reid Midfielder (on loan to Torquay)\n28 Scott Laird Defender\n29 Luke Summerfield Midfielder\n30 Dan Gosling Midfielder\n31 Anthony Mason Striker\n32 Bojan Djordjic Midfielder\n33 Rory Fallon Striker\n34 Ashley Barnes Striker\nPrevious Argyle Managers.\nThese are the team managers of Plymouth Argyle and the dates they took over."}
{"id": "3039", "revid": "212981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3039", "title": "Football", "text": "Football is a word which could mean one of several sports. The best-known type of football is association football. This is called \"soccer\" in North America, South Africa, and Australia to avoid confusion with other types of football that are commonly played there.\nThe name \"football\" comes from the two words 'foot' and 'ball'. It is named football because the players of the game walk and often run (on their feet) while playing, as opposed to (for example) polo where the players ride horses. Football is played using a ball, also called a 'football', that is usually shaped like a sphere or an ellipsoid. The ball is often kicked with the foot, but depending on the game, it can also be hit using other parts of the body (in association football) and handling the ball is a part of some other sports known as 'football'. Players can use any part of their body except their arms and hands. Goalies can use every part of their body to keep the ball out of the goal.\nSome elements of football have been seen in many countries, dating back to the second and third century AD in China. The modern games of both rugby football and association football comes from 19th-century England.\nKicking a ball, in Europe, was described in Britannia (now western scottish lowlands), in Germania (now Deutchland) and Gallia (now France and northern-central Italy). An evolution goes back to the Middle Ages in Paris. Association football (founded in Richmond, London at the end of 1800) spread to many other parts of Europe, and was brought to the rest of the world with colonization. Today, it is the most popular sport in the world and many people watch it on television, especially the FIFA World Cup that happens every four years. Ronaldo is the goat.\nEvery year there is a Football Club Competition called as Champions League. All the qualified big teams take part. At the end, we have one winner who takes the prestigious UEFA trophy. All big players play for their own teams. Some big players who take part every year are Mbappe, Ronaldo, Messi, Dybala, Neymar and many more."}
{"id": "3045", "revid": "733495", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3045", "title": "Poland", "text": "Poland is a country in Central Europe. Its official name is Republic of Poland. It is on the east of Germany (along Oder and Lusatian Neisse). The Czech Republic and Slovakia are to the south, Ukraine and Belarus to the east, and the Baltic Sea, Lithuania, and the Russian exclave Kaliningrad to the north. The total land area of Poland is about 312,679\u00a0km2 (120,728\u00a0mi2), slightly larger than Oman. This makes Poland the 77th largest country in the world with over 38.5 million people. Most Polish people live in large cities, including the capital, Warsaw (Polish: \"Warszawa\"), \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Cracow (Polish: \"Krak\u00f3w\"), the second capital of Poland (first was Gniezno), Szczecin, Gda\u0144sk, Wroc\u0142aw and Pozna\u0144.\nThe word \"Poland\" was written officially for the first time in 966. In 1569, Poland formed a strong union with Lithuania called the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. At some point in its history, it was the largest state in Europe and became very influential. Much of the territory that now makes up Central European states used to belong to that Commonwealth. Eventually, after a slow decline, the Commonwealth collapsed in 1795. Poland regained its independence in 1918 after World War I. In 1921, Poland defeated Soviet Russia in the Polish-Soviet War that started in 1919.\nHowever, Poland lost independence again not long after the beginning of World War II, after suffering a defeat by both the USSR and Nazi Germany. Although the government collapsed, the Polish people fought on by forming the largest and most effective resistance movement in Nazi-occupied Europe. It is most notable for disrupting German supply lines to the Eastern Front of WWII, providing military intelligence to the British, and for saving more Jewish lives in the Holocaust than any other Allied organization or government. After the war, Poland regained \"independence\" and became a communist country within the Eastern Bloc. The new government was appointed by Joseph Stalin and was under the control of the Soviet Union.\nIn 1989, Poland ceased being a communist country and became a liberal democracy. Its change of government was the first in a series of events that led to the states of Eastern and Central Europe regaining their independence and the fall of the USSR in 1991. After the democratic consolidation, Poland joined the European Union on 1 May 2004. Poland is also a member of NATO, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe first sign of humans in Polish lands was 500,000 years ago. The Bronze Age started around 2400-2300 BC. The Iron Age started around 750-700 BC. At that time the Polish lands were under the influence of the Lusatian culture. About 400 BC Celtic and Germanic tribes lived there. Those people had trade contacts with the Roman Empire.\nOver time, Slavs came to Polish lands. Some of those Slavs, now commonly referred to as Western Slavs (though in reality a diverse group of tribes with shared ethnic and cultural features), stayed there and started to create new nations. The most powerful tribe was called the Polans, who united all of the other Slavic tribes living there, and this is where the name \"Poland\" comes from.\nPiast and Jagiellon dynasties.\nPoland began to form into a country around the middle of the 10th century in the Piast dynasty. In 966, Prince Mieszko I became a Christian, and so the Polish people also became Christians. The next king was Boles\u0142aw I of Poland (called Boles\u0142aw the Brave). He conquered many lands and he became the first King of Poland. Casimir I of Poland changed the Polish capital from Gniezno to Krak\u00f3w. In the 12th century Poland broke into some smaller states after the death of King Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth in 1138 because of his will. Those states were later attacked by Mongol armies in 1241, which slowed down the unification of the small states into the big country of Poland. This happened eighty years later, in 1320, when W\u0142adys\u0142aw I became the King of the United Poland. His son Casimir III the Great reformed the Polish economy, built new castles and won the war against the Ruthenian Dukedom. Many people emigrated to Poland, becoming a haven for emigrants . Many Jewish people also moved into Poland during that time. The Black Death, which affected many parts of Europe from 1347 to 1351, did not come to Poland.\nAfter the death of the last Piast on the Polish throne, Casimir III, Louis I of Hungary and his daughter Jadwiga of Poland began their rule. She married the Lithuanian prince Jogaila. Their marriage started a new dynasty in Poland: the Jagiellon dynasty. Under the Jagiellon dynasty, Poland made an alliance with its neighbor Lithuania.\nPolish-Lithuanian Commonwealth to Second Republic of Poland.\nIn the 17th century Sweden attacked almost all of Poland (this was called \u201cthe Deluge\u201d). Many wars against the Ottoman Empire, Russia, Cossacks, Transylvania and Brandenburg-Prussia ended in 1699. For the next 80 years, the government and the nation were weak, making Poland dependent on Russia. Russian tsars took advantage of this by offering money to dishonest members of the Polish government, who would block new ideas and solutions. Russia, Prussia, and Austria broke Poland into three pieces in 1772, 1793 and 1795, which dissolved the country. Before the second split, a Constitution called \"The Constitution of 3 May\" was made in 1791. The Polish people did not like the new kings, and often rebelled (two big rebellions in 1830 and 1863).\nNapoleon made another Polish state, \u201cthe Duchy of Warsaw\u201d, but after the Napoleonic wars, Poland was split again by the countries at the Congress of Vienna. The eastern part was ruled by the Russian tsar. During World War I all the Allies agreed to save Poland. Soon after the surrender of Germany in November 1918, Poland became the Second Polish Republic (\"II Rzeczpospolita Polska\"). It got its freedom after several military conflicts; the largest was in 1919-1921 Polish-Soviet War.\nWorld War II.\nOn September 1, 1939, World War II started when Nazi Germany attacked Poland. The Soviet Union attacked Poland on September 17, 1939. Warsaw was defeated on September 28, 1939. Poland was split into two pieces, one half owned by Nazi Germany, the other by the Soviet Union. More than 6 million Polish people died, and half of these people were Jewish. Most of these deaths were part of the Holocaust, in which 6 million Jews were killed. At the war's end, Poland's borders were moved west, pushing the eastern border to the Curzon line. The western border was moved to the Oder-Neisse line. The new Poland became 20% smaller by 77,500 square kilometers (29,900 sq mi). The shift forced millions of Poles, Germans, Ukrainians, and Jews to move.\nPolish People's Republic to Third Polish Republic.\nAfter these events Poland gradually became a communist country. It was supposedly an independent country. But in reality the new government was appointed by Joseph Stalin. It was also under the control of the Soviet Union. The country was then renamed the People's Republic of Poland. There are many Poles in the neighboring countries Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania (these three countries were part of the Soviet Union until 1991), as well as in other countries. The most Poles outside of Poland are in the United States, especially in Chicago. Germany and the United Kingdom are also home to a large Polish diaspora. The most recent mass emigration of Poles to western countries began after 1989.\nIn 1989 Solidarity - a trade union led by Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa - helped defeat the communist government in Poland. Even before that event, Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa was given a Nobel Prize for leading the first non-communist trade union fighting for democracy in the Communist Block. When Communism ended in Poland there were many improvements in human rights, such as freedom of speech, democracy, etc. In 1991 Poland became a member of the Visegrad Group and joined NATO in 1999 along with the Czech Republic and Hungary. Polish voters then voted to join the European Union in a vote in June 2003. The country joined the EU on May 1, 2004.\nCurrently, the Prime Minister is Mateusz Morawiecki. On 10 April 2010 the President Lech Kaczy\u0144ski died in a government plane crash in Smolensk in Russia. The president is elected directly by the citizens for a five-year term. The Prime Minister is appointed by the President and confirmed by the \"Sejm\". The Sejm is the lower chamber of Parliament legislature for the country. It has 460 deputies elected every four years.\nGeography.\nPoland's territory is a plain reaching from the Baltic Sea in the north to the Carpathian Mountains in the south. Within that plain, the land varies from east to west.\nThe Polish Baltic coast is mostly smooth but has natural harbors in the Gda\u0144sk-Gdynia region and Szczecin in the far northwest. This coast has several spits, dunes and coastal lakes. Coast lakes are former bays that have been cut off from the sea. These areas are sometimes called lagoons. Szczecin Lagoon is on the western border with Germany. The Vistula Lagoon is on the eastern border with Kaliningrad, province of Russia. The longest river in Poland, the Vistula river, empties into the Vistula Lagoon and also directly into the Baltic Sea.\nThe northeastern region is densely wooded, sparsely populated and lacks agricultural and industrial resources. The geographical region has four hilly districts of moraines and lakes created by moraines. These formed during and after the Pleistocene ice age. The Masurian Lake District is the largest of the four districts and covers much of northeastern Poland.\nPoland has many lakes. In Europe only Finland has more lakes. The largest lakes are \u015aniardwy and Mamry. In addition to the lake districts in the north, there are also many mountain lakes in the Tatras mountains.\nSouth of the northeastern region is the regions of Silesia and Masovia, which are marked by broad ice age river valleys. Silesia region has many resources and people. Coal is abundant. Lower Silesia has large copper mining. Masovian Plain is in central Poland. It is in the valleys of three large rivers: Vistula, Bug and Narew.\nFurther south is the Polish mountain region. These mountains include the Sudetes and the Carpathian Mountains. The highest part of the Carpathians is the Tatra mountains which is along Poland\u2019s southern border. The tallest mountain in Poland, Rysy at 2,503 m (8,210\u00a0ft), is in the High Tatras.\nAdministrative divisions.\nPoland is made of sixteen regions known as voivodeships (\"wojew\u00f3dztwa\", singular - \"wojew\u00f3dztwo\"). They are basically created from the country's historical regions, whereas those of the past two decades (till 1998) had been focused on and named for separate cities. The new units range in areas from under 10,000\u00a0km2 (Opole Voivodeship) to over 35,000\u00a0km2 (Masovian Voivodeship). Voivodeships are controlled by voivod governments, and their legislatures are called voivodeship sejmiks.\nThe sixteen voivodeships that make up Poland are further divided into \"powiaty\" (singular \"powiat\"), second-level units of administration, which are about the same as to a county, district or prefecture in other countries.\nLiterature.\nAlmost no Polish literature remains before Christianisation in the 10th century. Polish literature was written in the Latin language during the Middle Ages. The Polish language was accepted as equal to Latin after the Renaissance for literature.\nJan Kochanowski was a leading poet of European Renaissance literature in the 16th century. Other great Polish poets include Adam Mickiewicz who wrote \"Pan Tadeusz\" epic in 1834.\nSeveral Polish novelists have won the Nobel prize. Henryk Sienkiewicz won in 19 dramatized versions of famous events in Polish history. W\u0142adys\u0142aw Reymont won a Nobel prize in 1924. He wrote the novel Ch\u0142opi. Two polish poets won Nobel prize as well. One is Wis\u0142awa Szymborska (1996) and the second Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz (1980).\nStanis\u0142aw Lem is a famous science fiction author in the modern era. His \"Solaris\" novel was made twice into a feature film.\nPeople.\nIn the past, Poland was inhabited by people from different nations and of different religions (mainly Catholics, Orthodox and Judaism). This changed after 1939, because of the Nazi Holocaust which killed many Polish Jews. After World War II, the country was changed into a communist country, by the Warsaw Pact which included most central European countries and Russia Russia.\nToday 38,038,000 people live in Poland (2011). In 2002 96.74% of the population call themselves Polish, while 471,500 people (1.23%) claimed another nationality. 774,900 people (2.03%) did not declare any nationality. Nationalities, or ethnic groups in Poland are Silesians, Germans (most in the former Opole Voivodeship), Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Russians, Jews and Belarusians. The Polish language is part of the West Slavic section of the Slavic languages. It is also the official language of Poland. English and German are the most common second languages studied and spoken.\nIn the past few years, Poland's population has gone down because of an increase in emigration and a sharp drop in the birth rate. In 2006, the census office estimated the total population of Poland at 38,536,869, a very small rise on the 2002 figure of 38,230,080. Since Poland's accession to the European Union, many Polish people have moved to work in Western European countries like the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland. Some organizations state people have left because of high unemployment (10.5%) and better opportunities for work somewhere else. In April 2007, the Polish population of the United Kingdom had risen to about 300,000 people and estimates predict about 65,000 Polish people living in the Republic of Ireland. However, in recent years strong growth of Polish economy and increasing value of Polish currency (PLN) makes many Polish immigrants to go back home. In 2007, the number of people leaving the country was lower than people who are coming back. Poland became an attractive place to work for people from other countries (mainly Ukraine).\nA Polish minority is still present in neighboring countries of Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania, as well as in other countries. The largest number of ethnic Poles outside of the country can be found in the United States.\nUrban demographics.\nThe lists below show the population count of Poland's largest cities based on 2005 estimates."}
{"id": "3046", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3046", "title": "Liter", "text": ""}
{"id": "3047", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3047", "title": "England", "text": "England is a country in Europe. It is a country with over sixty cities in it. It is in a union with Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. All four countries are in the British Isles and are part of the United Kingdom (UK).\nOver 55 million people live in England (2015 estimate). This is 84% of the population of the UK. The capital city of England is London, which is also the biggest city in the country. Other large cities in England are Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester and Leeds.\nThe English flag is a red cross on a white background. This cross is the cross of Saint George, who is the patron saint of England. Some other symbols used for England are a red rose and three lions.\nGeography.\nEngland is the largest part of the island of Great Britain, and it is also the largest constituent country of the United Kingdom. Scotland and Wales are also part of Great Britain (and the UK), Scotland to the north and Wales to the west. To the east and south, and part of the west, England is bordered by sea. France is to the south, separated by the English Channel. The Channel Tunnel, (Chunnel) under the English Channel, connects England to northern France (and the rest of mainland Europe). Ireland is a large island to the west, divided into Northern Ireland which is part of the United Kingdom, and the Republic of Ireland.\nLondon is the largest city and the capital. The longest river in England is the River Severn. Other large rivers are the Thames (which runs through London), the Trent and the Humber.\nIn geological terms, the Pennines, known as the \"backbone of England\", are the oldest range of mountains in the country, originating from the end of the Paleozoic Era around 300 million years ago. Most of England's landscape consists of low hills and plains, with upland and mountainous terrain in the north and west of the country. \nThe English Lowlands are in the central and southern regions of the country, consisting of green rolling hills, including the Cotswold Hills, Chiltern Hills, North and South Downs; where they meet the sea they form white rock exposures such as the cliffs of Dover. This also includes relatively flat plains such as the Salisbury Plain, Somerset Levels, South Coast Plain and The Fens.\nThe United Kingdom is reducing greenhouse gas emissions. It has met Kyoto Protocol target of a 12.5% reduction from 1990 levels and intends to meet the legally binding target of a 20% cut in emissions by 2010. In 2019, the British Parliament became the first national government in the world to officially declare a climate emergency. \nHistory.\nEngland was named after a Germanic tribe called the \"Angles\", who settled in Central, Northern, and Eastern England in the 5th and 6th centuries. A related tribe called the \"Saxons\" settled in the south of England. That is why that period of English history is called \"Anglo-Saxon\". For most of this time, England did not exist as a united country. The Anglo-Saxons lived in many small kingdoms, which slowly united. \nThe countries of England, Scotland and Wales correspond to boundaries of the earlier Roman Britain. It also corresponds with language differences, since the German tribes did not reach those areas, at least in any large numbers. The English language is derived from German languages of the time, whereas the native British languages of the time were Celtic languages.\nThe English kingdoms fought both the Scots, who were also uniting into one kingdom, and Danish invaders. The Danes formed their own large region in the Northeast of England called Danelaw. Many villages and towns in this area (particularly in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire) have Danish names, and use some Danish-based words. At one time Wessex (in the West of England) was the only English kingdom left. After many battles, King Alfred the Great of Wessex became king of the whole of England. The old kingdoms (Mercia, Northumbria, etc.) became provinces, called \"Earldoms\" and each governed by an Earl. By AD 927 Alfred's grandson Athelstan was the king of all of England not controlled by the Danes.\nWar with the Danes continued and from 1016 to 1042. The king of Denmark (Knut or Canute), died in 1035, and then his sons ruled England.\nWhen King Edward the Confessor died, Harold Godwinson (the Earl of Wessex) became king. William the Conqueror, Duke of Normandy (today part of northern France), said that Harold had promised to make William the king. He invaded England and fought King Harold at the Battle of Hastings in 1066. William won, and became king of England.\nThe kings of England spoke French for the next 300 years. England took over the country of Wales in the 13th century. There were many wars, often against France and Scotland.\nFor several centuries the religion of England was Roman Catholicism. The bishops (church leaders) of England and all their churches obeyed the Pope and the church in Rome. During the Protestant Reformation many did not agree with this. In the 1530s, the Pope told King Henry VIII that he could not divorce his wife. King Henry VIII created the Church of England (a \"Protestant\" church) partly so that he could divorce his wife. He made Protestantism the official church in England. For the next 200 years, there was struggle over whether the King (or Queen) of England should be \"Roman Catholic\" or \"Protestant\".\nQueen Elizabeth I was Henry's second daughter. She was a powerful queen who ruled for more than 40 years. When Queen Elizabeth I died, she had no children, and in 1603 James VI of Scotland (the son of Mary, Queen of Scots) became King James I of England. He called his two countries \"Great Britain\", but they were still separate countries with their own parliaments and laws, even though they were in personal union. They shared the same monarch.\nJames' son, Charles I and the English Parliament fought each other in the English Civil War (Scotland and Ireland were involved as well, but the story is complicated!). Oliver Cromwell became leader of the Parliamentary Army (the \"Roundheads\") and defeated the Royalist Army (the \"Cavaliers\"). King Charles was beheaded in 1649 and Oliver Cromwell became dictator (\"Lord Protector\"). When Cromwell died, his son Richard was not strong enough to rule, and Charles II, the son of Charles I, was invited to come to England and be king in 1660. \nWhen King Charles II died, his brother James II was the next king. A lot of people did not like James because he was Roman Catholic. William of Orange was invited to invade England. He was the ruler of part of the Netherlands and husband of Mary, the daughter of King James. Many people welcomed William because he was a Protestant. James left the country without a fight and Parliament asked William and Mary to become King and Queen together. When Mary II of England died, William ruled alone. Queen Mary's sister Anne became the next queen. While she was queen, England and Scotland were officially joined as one country. This was called the Acts of Union 1707. It also merged their separate parliaments. The parliament in London now included Scottish Members of Parliament (\"MPs\"), and was called the Parliament of Great Britain.\nAfter this, the history of England becomes the history of Great Britain and United Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom was formed in 1800, when the Irish Parliament merged with the British one. later on, many in Ireland fought against this merger. The result was the separation of the Republic of Ireland. This is not the whole island of Ireland. The rest of the island, Northern Ireland, is now the only part of Ireland still in the UK. England is the only country of UK not to have its own government, Parliament or Assembly, but is governed by Parliament of the United Kingdom. Seats in Parliament are decided by the number of electors in the various parts of the UK.\nAchievements.\nEngland has been central to many aspects of the modern world. Global exploration and trade, the British Empire, modern science, modern agriculture, railways, the Industrial Revolution, the development of modern representative democracy... In all these developments England was deeply involved. In some of them, such as the Industrial Revolution, England was the place that modern developments first occurred. \nThe Royal Society is a society for science and scientists. It was founded in 1660 by Charles II. It is the oldest society of its kind still in existence. \nLanguage.\nThe English language is a West Germanic language spoken in many countries around the world. With around 380 million native speakers, it is the second most spoken language in the world, as a native language. As many as a billion people speak it as a second language. English is an influence on, and has been influenced by, many different languages. \nWilliam Shakespeare was an English playwright. He wrote plays in the late 16th century. Some of his plays were \"Romeo and Juliet\" and \"Macbeth\". In the 19th century, Jane Austen and Charles Dickens were novelists. Twentieth century writers include the science fiction novelist H.G. Wells and J.R.R. Tolkien. The children's fantasy \"Harry Potter\" series was written by J.K. Rowling. Aldous Huxley was also from the United Kingdom. \nEnglish language literature is written by authors from many countries. Eight people from the United Kingdom have won the Nobel Prize in Literature.\nClimate.\nAll of Great Britain has an oceanic climate. There can be a temperature difference of 510\u00b0c between the north and the south (the north is generally colder), and there is often snow in the north before there is in the south.\nThe prevailing wind for most of the year is from the Atlantic, to the west of England. Therefore, there is more rain on the western side of the country. The east is colder and drier than the west. The country usually has a mild climate because the Gulf Stream to the western side is warm water. The climate is warmer than it was 200 years ago, and now ice and snow are rare in the southern part of the country. Occasionally, air from the Arctic Circle comes down the eastern side of the country and the temperature can drop below 0oC.\nPolitics.\nAs part of the United Kingdom, the basic political system in England is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary system. It has a monarch (meaning a king or queen is the head of that country). The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, who is officially the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. In the House of Commons which is the lower house of the British Parliament based at the Palace of Westminster, there are 532 Members of Parliament (MPs) for constituencies in England, out of the 650 total. \nThe English people are represented by members of Parliament, not ruled by monarchs. After the English Civil War, Oliver Cromwell became Lord Protector, and the monarchy was disbanded. Although the monarchy was restored after his death, the Crown slowly became the secondary power, and Parliament the first. Members of Parliament (called MPs) were elected, but until the early twentieth century, only men who owned property could vote. In the nineteenth century, more people were given suffrage. But in 1928, all men and women got the vote: this is called universal suffrage. Parliament is in Westminster in London, but it has power over the whole of the United Kingdom. \nAlmost all members of Parliament belong to political parties. The biggest parties are the Conservative Party, Labour Party, Liberal Democrats and Green Party. Members of the same party agree to act and vote more or less together. A party with more than half the seats (a majority) forms the government; the leader of the party becomes the Prime Minister, who then appoints other ministers. Because the government has a majority in Parliament, it can normally control what laws are passed. \nEconomy.\nEngland's economy is one of the largest and most dynamic in the world, with an average GDP per capita of \u00a328,100 or $36,000.\nUsually regarded as a mixed market economy, it has adopted many free market principles, yet maintains an advanced social welfare infrastructure. The official currency in England is the pound sterling, whose ISO 4217 code is GBP. Taxation in England is quite competitive when compared to much of the rest of Europe \u2013 as of 2014 the basic rate of personal tax is 20% on taxable income up to \u00a331,865 above the personal tax-free allowance (normally \u00a310,000), and 40% on any additional earnings above that amount.\nThe economy of England is the largest part of the UK's economy, which has the 18th highest GDP PPP per capita in the world. England is a leader in the chemical and pharmaceutical sectors and in key technical industries, particularly aerospace, the arms industry, and the manufacturing side of the software industry. London, home to the London Stock Exchange, the United Kingdom's main stock exchange and the largest in Europe, is England's financial centre, with 100 of Europe's 500 largest corporations being based there. London is the largest financial centre in Europe, and as of 2014 is the second largest in the world. Manchester is the largest financial and professional services sector outside London and is the mid tier private equity capital of Europe as well as one of the growing technology hubs of Europe.\nEducation.\nState primary schools and secondary schools exist. These consist of academy schools, grammar schools, foundation schools, faith schools, free schools, studio schools, university technical colleges and city technology colleges. The most common specialist schools are performing arts schools, science schools, maths schools, business schools and technology schools. Independent public or prep schools also exist. Eton College and Harrow School are the best known independent schools. \nThe National Curriculum was introduced in 1988, to give pupils a broad and balanced curriculum. The school curriculum aims to promote the spiritual, moral, cultural, mental and physical development of pupils. Its purpose is to prepare them for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of later life. Learning generally covers English literature, English language, maths, science, art and design, citizenship, religious education, geography, history, computing, design and technology, drama, ancient and modern foreign languages, business studies, food technology, music and physical education. \nMany prominent people who have reached the top in their fields have been products of English higher education. There have been universities in England since the Middle Ages. Ancient universities started in this time and in the Renaissance. The two oldest and most prestigious universities are Oxford University and Cambridge University. Imperial College, University College London and Manchester University are also highly rated by independent lists. There are now about a hundred universities.\nTransport.\nRoad traffic in the United Kingdom drives on the left hand side of the road (unlike the Americas and most of Europe), and the driver steers from the right hand side of the vehicle. The road network on the island of Great Britain is extensive, with most local and rural roads having evolved from Roman and Medieval times.\nThe system of rail transport was invented in England, so it has the oldest railway network in the world. It was built mostly during the Victorian era. The British Rail network is part privatised, with privately owned train operating companies providing service along particular lines or regions, whilst the tracks, signals and stations are owned by a Government controlled company called Network Rail. The system of underground railways in London, known as the Tube, has been copied by many other cities around the globe. \nEngland is home to the largest airport and is one of the most important international hubs in the world. \nMedia.\nThe BBC is an organisation in the United Kingdom. It broadcasts in the United Kingdom and other countries on television, radio and the Internet. The BBC also sells its programmes to other broadcasting companies around world. The organisation is run by a group of twelve governors who have been given the job by the Queen, on the advice of government ministers. The BBC is established under a royal charter, which allows the BBC to broadcast. \nEnglish culture.\nSee English literature,\nEnglish Heritage,\nAldeburgh Festival,\nThe Royal Society\nEnglish culture can be compared with Northern European countries, in the way that it is considered a bad thing to show off, as opposed to the US, where this is more acceptable. Humour, tradition and good manners are characteristics commonly associated with being English.\nSport.\nThe English football team won the World Cup in 1966. They came close in Italy 1990, closely losing in the semi-final against West Germany on penalties. In the 2006 World Cup they got to the quarter finals, then lost to Portugal after penalty kicks. In the 2018 FIFA World Cup, they came close again only to be knocked out in the semi-final, losing 2-1 to Croatia.\nEnglish people invented:\nOrigin partly in England:\nPeople from England.\nThere are many well known English people. Here are just a few of them:\nDivisions.\nEngland is divided into 48 ceremonial counties, which are also known as geographic counties. The counties of England are areas used for different purposes, which include administrative, geographical, cultural and political demarcation. The original county structure has its origins in the Middle Ages.\nThe historic counties of Yorkshire, Cumberland, Westmorland, Huntingdonshire and Middlesex are the five defunct ceremonial counties which were historically counties.\nWith their abolition as ceremonial counties, Yorkshire is divided for that purpose into the East Riding of Yorkshire, North Yorkshire, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire, Cumberland and Westmorland were combined with a former exclave of Lancashire to form Cumbria, Huntingdonshire merged into Cambridgeshire, and the vast majority of Middlesex became part of Greater London.\nThere is no well-established series of official symbols or flags covering all the counties. From 1889 the newly-created county councils could apply to the College of Arms for coats of arms. A recent series of flags, with varying levels of official adoption, have been established in many of the counties by competition or public poll. County days are a recent innovation in some areas. There are seventeen first-class county cricket teams that are based on historical English counties. \nTwelve of the 51 cities in England are in metropolitan counties and their city councils are single-tier metropolitan district councils. Outside the metropolitan counties eleven cities are unitary authorities, and fifteen have ordinary district councils, which are subordinate to their local county council."}
{"id": "3048", "revid": "1073251", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3048", "title": "Wales", "text": "Wales\u00a0(;\u00a0 [\u02c8k\u0259m.r\u0268] (come-ree) is a\u00a0country on the island of Great Britain. It is one of the four countries that make up the\u00a0United Kingdom. It is west of England, and east of the Irish Sea and Ireland.\nWales is one of the six\u00a0Celtic nations. The native people of Wales, the Welsh, have their own culture and traditions. They have their own Celtic language, Welsh. Although not all Welsh people can speak Welsh, it is a real living language for about 20% of Welsh people. Nearly all Welsh people can speak English. Some of them speak only English. The Welsh language has official status in Wales. \nThree million people live in Wales. Most of them live in the southern and eastern parts of the country. In this area is the capital and largest city of Wales, Cardiff, and the next largest city, Swansea.\nHistory.\nPeople have lived in Wales for at least 29,000 years. The Romans first entered Wales in 43 AD, and took it around 77 AD.\nThe word 'Wales'.\nThe English words \"Wales\" and \"Welsh\" come from the old Germanic word\u00a0\"Walh\" (plural:\u00a0\"Walha\").\u00a0\"Walh\" itself came from a Celtic tribe, called the\u00a0\"Volcae\" by the\u00a0Romans. That was eventually used for the name of all Celts and later to all people who lived in the\u00a0Roman empire. The\u00a0Anglo-Saxons who lived in\u00a0England and who spoke\u00a0Old English called the people living in Wales\u00a0\"W\u00e6lisc\" and the land itself\u00a0\"W\u0113alas\". Other names that come from these origins\u00a0Wallonia,\u00a0Wallachia, and Vlachs.\nIn the past, the words\u00a0\"Wales\" and\u00a0\"Welsh\" were used to mean anything that the\u00a0Anglo-Saxons associated with the Celtic Britons. That included Cornwall, Walworth, and\u00a0Walton, as well as things associated with non-Germanic Europeans like\u00a0walnuts.\nThe modern Welsh name for themselves is Cymry, and Cymru which is the Welsh name for Wales. These words are descended from the Brythonic word combrogi, meaning \"fellow-countrymen\"\nConquest by Edward I and brief independence under Owain Glynd\u0175r.\nAfter Llywelyn ap Gruffudd died in 1282, Edward I of\u00a0England\u00a0finished his conquest of Wales, which made it a part of England.\u00a0Owain Glynd\u0175r\u00a0was a Welsh leader who fought against English rule in the early 15th century. However, after he was defeated by the English, the whole of Wales was taken over by England, with the Laws in Wales Acts 1535\u20131542.\nLaws in Wales Acts and annexation by England.\nIn the 16th century, the Laws in Wales Acts 1535\u20131542 were passed in England while\u00a0Henry VIII\u00a0was king there. These added Wales to England. They also said that people who spoke Welsh instead of English could not hold public office.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nWales is on ancient rocks which were once in the roots of great mountain systems. In the last three centuries the products of those rocks have transformed what was once an agricultural landscape.\nRocks were smelted to release copper and iron, key products needed by the industrial revolution. Coal itself is moved by canals and later by rail to England.\nSocial justice was needed for the workers who came into Wales to do this work.\nAt the start of the\u00a0industrial revolution, the\u00a0mining\u00a0and\u00a0metal\u00a0industries transformed the country from an agricultural society into an industrial country. The new jobs in South Wales caused a quick rise in the number of people living in Wales. This is the reason why two-thirds of the population live in South Wales, mainly in the capital\u00a0Cardiff\u00a0(\"Caerdydd\"), as well as\u00a0Swansea\u00a0(\"Abertawe\"),\u00a0Newport\u00a0(\"Casnewydd\"), and in the nearby valleys. Now that the coal industry has become a lot smaller, Wales' economy depends mostly on the\u00a0public sector, light and service industries and\u00a0tourism. In 2010, the Gross Value Added of Wales was \u00a345.5 billion - \u00a315,145 per head, 74.0% of the average for the UK, and the lowest GVA per head in Britain.\nReturn of Welsh identity and devolution of Government.\nIt took until the 19th Century for Welsh-centric politics to return to Wales.\u00a0Liberalism in Wales, which was introduced in the early 20th century by Lloyd George, was overtaken by the growth of socialism and the\u00a0Labour Party. However, Welsh pride got stronger, and in 1925\u00a0Plaid Cymru was made, which was the first political party to campaign for Welsh independence. In 1962, the Welsh Language Society was made to encourage the\u00a0Welsh language, which had nearly disappeared during the take over by England. A big change was made in 1998, when the first Government of Wales for the country since its addition to the United Kingdom under the Government of Wales Act (1998). This created an Assembly for Wales, known in Welsh as the senedd. The Senedd has responsibility for a range of laws which have been\u00a0devolved from the main\u00a0UK government in\u00a0Westminster. This means the members of the Assembly can change certain laws in Wales to be different to the rest of the UK.\nGeography.\nWales has a coastline which is 1680 miles long, and the country itself is 20,779\u00a0km2\u00a0large. The highest mountains in Wales are in\u00a0Gwynedd, in the north-west, and include\u00a0Snowdon (\"\"), which is the highest peak in Wales at 1085 m (3,560\u00a0ft). There are three National Parks in Wales:\u00a0Snowdonia (), Brecon Beacons (), and\u00a0Pembrokeshire Coast ().\nPolitics.\nLocal government.\nWales is divided into 22 council areas. These areas are responsible for local government services, such as education, social work, environment and roads services.\n\"The list to the right of the map shows counties, unless they are marked *, meaning they are cities, or \u2020 for County Boroughs. Welsh-language forms are given in parentheses.\"\nWelsh identity.\nWelsh people are very proud of their country. The first people in Wales to call themselves 'Welsh' were the Celts. The Celts lived in Wales after the Romans left in the 5th century. The national emblems of Wales are\u00a0leeks and\u00a0daffodils.\u00a0\nAlthough Wales is very close to the rest of Great Britain, and despite most people speaking\u00a0English, the country has always had a distinct\u00a0culture. It is officially\u00a0bilingual in English and Welsh. Over 560,000 people in Wales speak the\u00a0Welsh language. In some parts of the north and west of the country, particularly in small, rural communities, the majority of people speak\u00a0Welsh.\nFrom the late 19th century, Wales became famous as the \"land of song\", and for its\u00a0Eisteddfod culture festival. At many international sport events, for example the\u00a0FIFA World Cup, the\u00a0Rugby World Cup, and the\u00a0Commonwealth Games, Wales competes on its own, as a separate country. However, at most international events, such at the\u00a0Olympics, Wales competes with the rest of the Great Britain, and sometimes as the\u00a0United Kingdom with\u00a0Northern Ireland included.\u00a0Rugby Union is strongly associated with Wales as a national sport.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nThe main road on the coast of South Wales is the M4 motorway. It links Wales to southern England, and London. It also connects the Welsh cities of Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. The A55 road is the main road along the north Wales coast, and connects Holyhead and Bangor with Wrexham and Flintshire. It also links to north-west England, including Chester. The main road between North and South Wales is the A470 road, which goes from the capital Cardiff to Llandudno.\nAirports.\nCardiff International Airport is the only large airport in Wales. It has flights to Europe, Africa and North America and is about southwest of Cardiff, in the Vale of Glamorgan. Flights between places in Wales run between Anglesey (Valley) and Cardiff, and are operated by the Isle of Man airline called Manx2 Other internal flights operate to northern England, Scotland and Northern Ireland.\nRailway.\nCardiff Central is Wales' busiest railway station. The area around Cardiff also has its own rail network. Trains from north to south Wales go through the English towns of Chester and Shrewsbury on the Welsh Marches Line. Most trains in Wales are powered by diesel. However, the South Wales Main Line which is used by trains going from London Paddington to Cardiff and Swansea, is electric.\nSea.\nWales has four ferry ports. Regular ferries to Ireland go from Holyhead, Pembroke and Fishguard. The Swansea to Cork ferry which was stopped in 2006, but then opened again in March 2010, and closed again in 2012."}
{"id": "3049", "revid": "1051488", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3049", "title": "Scotland", "text": "Scotland () is one of the four countries of the United Kingdom. Scotland is the northern third of Great Britain (an island in the North Atlantic Ocean). Many other islands in the British Isles are also part of Scotland. To the south of Scotland is England, the North Sea is to the east, the Atlantic Ocean is to the west and the Irish Sea is to the south-west.\nThe capital city of Scotland is Edinburgh on the east coast, but the biggest city is Glasgow on the west coast. Other cities in Scotland are Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness, Perth and Stirling. About five million people live in Scotland. Most of the population lives in the Central Belt, an area between the Scottish Highlands and the Scottish Lowlands. \nUnlike most of Great Britain, most of Scotland was not part of the Roman Empire and did not become part of Anglo-Saxon England. In the Middle Ages and the Early Modern Period, Scotland was an independent kingdom. The Kingdom of Scotland started in the 9th century AD. The kingdom started to share a king with the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Ireland in 1603. In that year, the king of Scotland inherited the two kingdoms of Elizabeth I, and James VI of Scotland became the first king of the whole British Isles. In 1707, the parliament of Scotland joined with the parliament of England to become the Parliament of Great Britain. This formed the United Kingdom of Great Britain. This kingdom joined with the Kingdom of Ireland in 1801 to make the modern United Kingdom.\nThroughout its history Scotland has had its own legal system (Scots law), church (the Church of Scotland), schools, and culture. Since 1999, Scotland has had its own parliament, the Scottish Parliament. It was devolved from the British parliament. The Scottish people have representation in both parliaments. The Scottish Government and the British Government both govern Scotland. On 18 September 2014, a referendum on independence from the United Kingdom took place. A majority (55%) voted to stay in the United Kingdom.\nThe Flag of Scotland is blue with a white diagonal cross (a saltire). This is the cross of Saint Andrew, who is the patron saint of Scotland. Oher symbols used for Scotland are the thistle and the unicorn. An image of a red lion \"rampant\" (standing on its back legs) on a gold background with a red border is the traditional coat of arms of the Scots monarchy.\nGeography.\nThe mainland of Scotland makes up \u2153 of the size of the Great Britain, and is to the northwest of mainland Europe.\nThe size of the land of Scotland is 78,772km\u00b2 (30,414 sq mi). Scotland's only land border is with England, and runs for 96 kilometres (60 mi) across. The Atlantic Ocean borders the west coast and the North Sea is to the east. The island of Ireland is only 30 kilometres (20 mi) from the southern part of Kintyre, Norway is 305\u00a0kilometres (190\u00a0mi) to the east and the Faroe Islands are 270\u00a0kilometres (168\u00a0mi) to the north. Scotland's land also includes several islands, including the Inner and Outer Hebrides off the west coast and the archipelagoes of Orkney and Shetland to the north of the mainland.\nCompared to the other areas of the islands of Great Britain and Ireland, Scotland is sparsely populated, most especially the north-western half of it. The main geographical feature that dictates this is the Highland Boundary Fault which roughly splits the country in half from the southwest to the northeast. \nTo the north and west of the Highland Boundary Fault are the more mountainous Scottish Highlands and islands, and this half of the country contains less than 5% of the total population. To the south and east of the Highland Boundary Fault is the Scottish Lowlands, which contain the vast majority (about 75%) of the Scottish population, and 3 of the 4 biggest cities (Glasgow which is 1st, Edinburgh which is 2nd, and Dundee which is 4th). Below the lowlands are the Southern Uplands which are hilly, but not as hilly at the Highlands. They are less densely populated than the lowlands, but still a lot more dense than the highlands and islands. \nLocated within the central part of the lowlands is the \"Central Belt\", a rectangle of land roughly 88 kilometres (55 miles) from West to East and 48 kilometres (30 miles) North to South. About half of the population of Scotland lives within these roughly 4,530 square kilometres (or 1,750 square miles), which is a little more than 2% of the total land area of Scotland. This is the area between Scotland\u2019s two largest cities - Glasgow, at the Central Belt\u2019s Western end, and Edinburgh, at the Central Belt\u2019s Eastern end. This area is geographically bound by two bays of water \u2013 the Firth of Clyde to the West and the Firth of Forth to the East. It is the most fertile Earth in Scotland, which is why it is so population-dense, compared to the rest of the country.\nThe tallest mountain in Scotland is Ben Nevis, which is also the tallest mountain in the British Isles.\nHistory.\nThe history of Scotland begins when humans first began to live in Scotland after the end of the last ice age. Of the Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age civilization that existed in the country, many fossils remain, but no written records were left behind. These people did not have writing.\nSt Kilda, Heart of Neolithic Orkney and Skara Brae are all World Heritage Sites, as are the Antonine Wall and New Lanark on the mainland.\nBecause of where Scotland is in the world and its strong reliance on trade routes by sea, the nation held close links in the south and east with the Baltic countries, and through Ireland with France and Europe. The sea was very important for trade reasons. Following the Acts of Union and Industrial Revolution, Scotland grew to be one of the largest commercial, intellectual and industrial states in Europe.\nCaledonians, Picts, and Romans.\nThe written history of Scotland begins when the Roman Empire came to the British Isles. The Romans gave Great Britain its name in or . The Romans overcame and controlled what is now England, Wales, and southern Scotland. To the north of the River Forth was \"Caledonia\", land not fully owned by the Romans. The Romans, built cities like Edinburgh when they built the Antonine wall. The Romans had military camps and forts in much of Scotland. In Classical Antiquity, the Romans named the people in Caledonia in . During Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages, the people of Caledonia were the Picts. The Roman army left Great Britain in the 5th century, and by the time Roman military had fought many wars with the Picts. They Romans also fought the Scoti and the Saxons. Both the Scoti and the Saxons came to the land.\nScoti, Picts, and Saxons.\nIn the Early Middle Ages, the Picts lived in a part of the land with the name Pictland. The Scoti came from Ireland and started the kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata. Parts of south-western Scotland and northern Ireland were part of D\u00e1l Riata. People there spoke old Goidelic languages, but what kind of language Picts spoke is remains a puzzle, probably a certain kind of Celtic or non-Indo-European language. The Saxons came from Continental Europe. In the British Isles they have the name Anglo-Saxons. South-eastern Scotland became part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria. Their language was Old English.\nIn Pictland, the Picts started the Kingdom of Alba in the 9th-century. The kingdom began in the land between the River Spey and the River Forth. The Pictish language went extinct, and people in the 10th-century kingdom of Alba spoke the Goidelic language, Scots Gaelic. In time, the kingdom grew. The lands of Moray and Angus became part of the kingdom. The northern parts of Northumbria, south of the River Forth, became part of the kingdom.\nPeople began to build large towns in the 10th century.\nNorse.\nMost of the Scottish islands were ruled by the Norse (and then by Norwegians and Danes) for over four hundred years. The Kingdom of the Isles was a Norse kingdom in the western, coastal parts of Scotland. They spoke the Old Norse language.\nThe Norse lands include the Hebrides to the west and Orkney and Shetland to the north. The Isle of Man was also a part of the Kingdom of the Isles. The islands still have a culture of their own.\nWars of Independence.\nThe Wars of Scottish Independence were many military campaigns fought between Scotland and England in the late 13th and early 14th centuries.\nThe First War (1296\u20131328) began with the Edward I of England's invasion of Scotland in 1296, and ended with the signing of the Treaty of Edinburgh-Northampton in 1328. The Second War (1332\u20131357) began with the English-supported invasion of Scotland by Edward Balliol and the 'Disinherited' in 1332, and ended around 1357 with the signing of the Treaty of Berwick.\nThe wars were part of a great national crisis for Scotland and the period became one of the most important moments in the nation's history. At the end of both wars, Scotland was an independent kingdom. The wars were also important for other reasons, such as the invention of the longbow as an important weapon in medieval warfare.\nA series of deaths in the line of succession in the 1280s, followed by King Alexander III's death in 1286 left the Scottish crown in crisis. His granddaughter, Margaret, the \"Maid of Norway\", a four-year-old girl, was the heir.\nEdward I of England, as Margaret's great-uncle, suggested that his son (also a child) and Margaret should marry, stabilising the Scottish line of succession. In 1290 Margaret's guardians agreed to this, but Margaret herself died in Orkney on her voyage from Norway to Scotland before she was made Queen, or her wedding could take place.\nBecause there was no clear heir to the throne anymore, the Scottish people decided to ask Edward I of England to choose their king. The strongest candidate was called Robert Bruce. Robert Bruce had castles all around the country, and had a private army. But Edward wanted to invade Scotland, so he chose the weaker candidate, who was John Balliol. He had the strongest claim to the throne, and became king on 30 November 1292. Robert Bruce decided to accept this decision (his grandson and namesake later took the throne as Robert I).\nOver the next few years, Edward I kept trying to undermine both the authority of King John and the independence of Scotland. In 1295, John, on the recommendation of his chief councillors, entered into an alliance with France. This was the beginning of the Auld Alliance.\nIn 1296, Edward invaded Scotland. He removed King John from power, and put him in jail. The following year William Wallace and Andrew de Moray raised an army from the southern and northern parts of the country to fight the English. Under their joint leadership, an English army was defeated at the Battle of Stirling Bridge. For a short time Wallace ruled Scotland in the name of John Balliol as Guardian of the realm.\nEdward came north in person and defeated Wallace at the Battle of Falkirk in 1298. Wallace escaped but resigned as Guardian of Scotland. John Comyn and Robert the Bruce were put in his place. In 1305 Wallace was captured by the English, who executed him for treason. Wallace claimed he did not commit treason as he was not loyal to England.\nIn February 1306 Robert Bruce murdered John Comyn, a leading rival, in a church. Bruce went on to take the crown, but Edward's army overran the country yet again after defeating Bruce's small army at the Battle of Methven. Despite the excommunication of Bruce and his followers by Pope Clement V, his support slowly strengthened; and by 1314, with the help of leading nobles such as Sir James Douglas and the Earl of Moray, only the castles at Bothwell and Stirling were still under English control.\nEdward I died in Carlisle in 1307. His heir, Edward II, moved an army north to break the siege of Stirling Castle and again take control. Robert defeated that army at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, securing temporary independence. In 1320, a letter to the Pope from the nobles of Scotland (the Declaration of Arbroath) went part of the way towards convincing Pope John XXII to overturn the earlier excommunication and cancel the various acts of submission by Scottish kings to English ones so that Scotland's independence could be recognised by other European countries.\nIn 1326, the first full Parliament of Scotland met. The parliament was made from an earlier council of nobility and clergy around 1235, but in 1326 representatives of the burghs\u2014the burgh commissioners\u2014joined them to form the Three Estates.\nIn 1328, Edward III signed the Treaty of Northampton which declared Scottish independence under the rule of Robert the Bruce. Four years after Robert's death in 1329, England invaded Scotland yet again, looking to put the \"Rightful King\"\u2014Edward Balliol, son of John Balliol\u2014to the Scottish throne, starting the Second War of Independence. In the face of tough Scottish resistance, led by Sir Andrew Murray, attempts to secure Balliol on the throne failed. Edward III lost interest in Balliol after the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War with France. In 1341 David II, King Robert's son and heir, was able to return from temporary exile in France. Balliol finally resigned his empty claim to the throne to Edward in 1356, before retiring to Yorkshire, where he died in 1364.\nUnion of the Crowns.\nIn 1603, Elizabeth I, queen of England and of Ireland, died. The king of Scotland was the queen's heir apparent, and James VI of Scotland (son of Mary, Queen of Scots) became king of England and king of Ireland. James VI and I (from Scotland's House of Stuart) went to England to control the government, and none of Scotland's kings came to Scotland for more than one hundred years.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 1707, Scotland and England were joined in the Act of Union to make one big Kingdom, the Kingdom of Great Britain. When Ireland joined in 1801, the United Kingdom was created. Scotland was an important part of the colonialism and imperialism of the British Empire. Scots colonists emigrated throughout the empire, and a large diaspora of Scots lives throughout the world as a result. The Scottish Enlightenment was an important part of the Age of Enlightenment. Philosophers like David Hume and Adam Smith led the Scottish Enlightenment.\nSoldiers fought some of the wars caused by Jacobitism in Scotland. The Jacobites wanted the Roman Catholic House of Stuart, and not the Protestant House of Hanover to be kings of Britain and of Ireland. The last land battle in Great Britain was the Battle of Culloden in 1745. At that time the government's British Army stopped the Catholic rebellion led by Charles Edward Stuart. Scots-speakers and English-speakers moved many Gaelic speakers off lands in the Scottish Highlands, and many emigrated to the British Empire and the United States. In the 19th century, George IV visited Scotland. After that, Scotland and Scottish culture became more popular. Tourism to Scotland started in the 19th century.\nIn a referendum in 1997, a majority of voters in Scotland chose to have political devolution. The Scottish Parliament, Scottish Government, and the office of first minister of Scotland was set up in 1999.\nOne first minister of Scotland, Alex Salmond, led the Scottish National Party's Scottish Government from 2007. in 2014, the Scottish independence referendum ended in a majority (55%) voting against independence from the United Kingdom. Nicola Sturgeon became first minister on 20 November 2014.\nLanguage.\nThe official languages of Scotland are English, Scots and Gaelic. English is spoken by most people in Scotland, while only a small number, mostly in the Western Isles, speaks Gaelic. Gaelic began declining in the late Middle Ages when Scottish kings and nobles preferred English.\nSports.\nFootball.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Scotland. Three of the big cities, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dundee, have two or three big football teams, and most cities have at least one team. The two most famous teams in Scotland are known as the \"Old Firm\". These are Celtic and Rangers. These two Glasgow clubs have a lot of history, and are fierce rivals, often causing fights, riots and even murders between the fans. Rangers are world record holders, having won the most amount of league titles of any football team, currently 55.\nScotland were the winners of the Homeless World Cup in 2007 and are the current champions after they won in August 2011. They defeated Mexico 4\u20133 in Paris, France.\nOther football clubs.\nThe other main clubs in Scotland are Aberdeen, Hearts, Hibs and Dundee United. These teams are in the Premier League right now, and usually take the most places in the top six of the league.\nSome other Scottish clubs include Gretna, who won three titles in a row, moving from the Third Division, to the SPL in only three seasons. Gretna ran out of money, and they were shut down. Also, Raith Rovers, who famously played UEFA Cup Winners, Bayern M\u00fcnchen. Raith Rovers were knocked out by Bayern M\u00fcnchen, but managed to lead 1-0 at half time. Queen of the south also reached the Europa league, after reaching the 2008 Scottish cup final. they lost 3 -2 to Rangers.\nScottish Premier League.\nThe top division of Scottish Football is called the \"Scottish Premier League\" (or SPL), and is currently sponsored by the Clydesdale Bank, a large Scottish Bank. In 2013, its name was changed to \"Scottish Premiership\".\nRugby.\nIn 1925, 1984 and 1990, Scotland were winners of the Five Nations' Gran Slam, having beaten all four other teams - England, Wales, Ireland and France.\nGolf.\nGolf is a popular sport in Scotland. It is unique, as Scotland is the birthplace of golf, and there are many public golf courses where people can play for small fees. Everywhere else in the world, golf is a game for the rich.\nSandy Lyle was the first Scottish golfer to win a major title in modern times. Colin Montgomery is one of the best players never to have won a major championship after finishing second five times.\nMotorsports.\nScotland is also involved with motorsports. Former F1 driver David Coulthard is a thirteen time Grand Prix winner. Jackie Stewart is a 3-time F1 World Champion and regarded as one of the best drivers ever. Jim Clark was a 2-time F1 World Champion and regarded as one of the best ever with Fangio, Schumacher and Senna. Colin McRae was also the 1995 World Rally Champion.\nElephant Polo.\nScotland were the world champions of the unusual sport of Elephant Polo in 2004. Elephant Polo, registered as an Olympic sport with the Nepal Olympic Committee, was invented by Scotsman Nathan Mochan in 1983.\nTennis.\nAndy Murray, originally from Scotland, is currently the United Kingdom's best tennis player, having won singles titles at the US Open, and Wimbledon, where his 2013 win ended a 77-year wait for a British man to win the competition. He also won Olympic Gold in the men's singles at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. His brother, Jamie Murray, is a successful doubles player.\nTraditional music.\nTraditional Scottish musical instruments include: the bagpipe, accordion, the fiddle, the harp and tin whistle."}
{"id": "3050", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3050", "title": "Northern Ireland", "text": "Northern Ireland (, Ulster ) is a constituent country of the United Kingdom, which is on the island of Ireland.\nThe whole island of Ireland used to be a kingdom, called the Kingdom of Ireland but after the Act of Union in the year 1800, it became part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. This stayed until 1922, after a civil war, when Ireland was divided into the Republic of Ireland, the sovereign state that takes up the southern part of the island, and Northern Ireland, which stayed as part of the UK.\nAbout 1.8 million people live in Northern Ireland, which has the capital and largest city is Belfast. The historic administrative roles of its 6 counties have since 1972 been replaced by 26 unitary authorities Counties of Northern Ireland.\nSometimes people use other names for Northern Ireland. Some call it Ulster, even though some parts of Ulster are actually in the Republic of Ireland. Others call it \"the North\" or \"the Six Counties\", because they do not want to recognize that a part of the island of Ireland is not fully independent and the north of it is actually in the United Kingdom. Northern Ireland is the smallest part of the United Kingdom at 5,345 sq mi.\nThe only official flag in Northern Ireland is the Union Flag of the United Kingdom. The Ulster Banner, however, is still used as the by loyalists and unionists, and to represent Northern Ireland internationally in some sporting competitions.\nLanguages.\nEnglish is spoken by almost everyone in Northern Ireland. Another important language is Irish (sometimes called \"Irish Gaelic\") and a language known as Ulster Scots, which comes from Eastern Ulster and Lowland Scotland. The Irish language became less widely spoken in the 20th century, but a revival has led to increased usage, especially in Belfast, the Glens of Antrim and counties Tyrone and Fermanagh. This revival has been driven largely through the creation of Irish-language schools. The Irish language is spoken by some nationalists (whether Catholic or Protestant) people. Ulster Scots is almost exclusive to areas of North Antrim and the Ards Peninsula.\nSome languages like Chinese, Urdu or Polish are becoming more common in Northern Ireland as people from other countries move to Northern Ireland.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the largest religion in Northern Ireland, with over 80% of the population identifying themselves with a Christian denomination at the 2011 census. Almost 42% of these people identify as Protestant, 41% as Roman Catholic, and just over 17% as nothing or another religion. The largest Protestant churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, the Church of Ireland and the Methodist Church in Ireland.\nBelfast Agreement.\nSince the Belfast Agreement (sometimes called the Good Friday Agreement) of Friday, 10 April 1998, there has been mainly peace between the two communities in Northern Ireland, the Protestants and Catholics. This agreement was agreed by most of the people in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, as well as the Irish and British governments. It allows for the self-government of Northern Ireland and greater north\u2013south co-operation and co-operation between Britain and the Republic of Ireland. Additionally, it makes clear the right of the people of Northern Ireland to decide their constitutional future and select whether they are British citizens, Irish citizens or both.\nSport.\nThe most popular sports in Northern Ireland are association football, gaelic football and rugby union. Athletics, boxing, cricket, golf, hockey, hurling, snooker and motor sports are also common. Most sports are organised on an all-Ireland basis, and in international competitions, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland compete together as Ireland (e.g. Ireland national rugby union team, Ireland national cricket team). The main exception is football.\nFootball in Northern Ireland is governed by the Irish Football Association (IFA). In international competitions Northern Ireland has its own team - the Northern Ireland national football team. The Northern Ireland team has qualified for three FIFA World Cups (in 1958, 1982 and 1986). Perhaps the most famous player from Northern Ireland was George Best.\nTrack and field athletes from Northern Ireland can choose to compete either with athletes from Great Britain (as the team \"Great Britain &amp; Northern Ireland\"), or with athletes from the rest of Ireland (as \"Ireland\").\nBelfast is home to the Ulster Rugby team (which competes in the Pro 12 league and Heineken Cup), and the Belfast Giants ice-hockey team.\nRailways.\nTrains are run by NI Railways which run from Belfast to Portrush, Londonderry, Bangor, Larne, Portadown and Newry. The Enterprise is run by both NI Railways and Irish Rail and links Belfast to Dublin."}
{"id": "3051", "revid": "766335", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3051", "title": "Great Britain", "text": "Great Britain is an island in the north-west Atlantic Ocean, one of the British Isles. It is the biggest European island, off the coast of Continental Europe. To the west of Great Britain is Ireland, across the Irish Sea. Across the English Channel to the south of Great Britain is France. Across the North Sea to the east is Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark and Norway. Together with many other smaller islands, Great Britain and Ireland have the name British Isles.\nThe island is part of the United Kingdom, a sovereign state which shares the name Britain with the island. Three of the United Kingdom's countries are mostly on Great Britain: England, Scotland, and Wales. The largest city on Great Britain is London. London is the capital city of the United Kingdom and also the capital of England. Most of Great Britain is part of England. The northern third of the island is part of Scotland. In the south-west of Great Britain is Wales.\nThe United Kingdom had the name Great Britain between the Acts of Union 1707 and the Act of Union 1800. Northern Ireland is not on the island of Great Britain, but it is part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. (The island of Ireland contains nearly all of the Republic of Ireland, which is a sovereign state, as well as nearly all of Northern Ireland.) Great Britain is not the official name of a present-day state. Some people call the United Kingdom \"Great Britain\" and people from other parts of the United Kingdom may not like it when people make this mistake.\nPolitical definition.\nGreat Britain is the largest island of the United Kingdom. Politically, Great Britain means England, Scotland, and Wales in combination, but not Northern Ireland. \nIslands such as the Isle of Wight, the Isles of Scilly, Anglesey, the Hebrides, and the island groups of Orkney and Shetland are all part of the United Kingdom. In geography they are not part of Great Britain. For political uses and law, these islands are part of Great Britain because they are parts of the two old kingdoms: Scotland and England (including Wales). \nGreat Britain does not include the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands, which are self-governing crown dependencies.\nHistory.\nThe writings of the Roman cartographer Ptolemy used the name \"Great Britain\" for the island in the 2nd century AD. He used the name \"Megale Britannia\" or \"Great Britain\" () to show the difference between this larger island and Ireland. For Ireland, Ptolemy used the name \"Mikra Britannia\" or \"Little Britain\" ().\nIn the later Middle Ages, the kings of England were also the kings of Ireland. However, the two kingdoms were separate, even though they had the same king. In 1603, the two kingdoms in Great Britain (Scotland and England) also started to share the same king. In 1604, James VI and I was the first king to be named \"King of Great Britain\". He was the king of Scotland when England's queen, Elizabeth I, died. From Elizabeth, James inherited the kingdoms of England and Ireland, whereby Great Britain (and the British Isles started) to share one king. People started to use the Union Jack flag in the time of King James, who had ordered ships to use it in 1607. The flag joined the flag of Scotland and the flag of England together in one flag. However, the three kingdoms were separate. \nThe political union that joined the kingdoms of England and Scotland happened because of the Acts of Union 1707. These acts of parliament merged the two nations' parliaments (the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England), and joined the two kingdoms into a new Kingdom of Great Britain, or the United Kingdom of Great Britain. The whole island became one kingdom in this way on 1 May 1707, while Anne as queen. The Union Jack changed to its present design, which now has another saltire. \nThe Parliament of Ireland and the Parliament of Great Britain also merged with one another because of the Act of Union 1800. In 1801, Great Britain and Ireland started to be one kingdom: the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. This happened on 1 January 1801, while George III was king. The Irish Free State left the United Kingdom in 1922, and in 1927, the UK's name changed to be the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. "}
{"id": "3052", "revid": "7790826", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3052", "title": "List of English football teams", "text": "This is a list of English football teams and the leagues they play in."}
{"id": "3053", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3053", "title": "Scottish Football League", "text": "These are the Scottish football (soccer) teams and the leagues they played in for the 2005/06 season.\nScottish Premier League.\nAberdeen F.C..\nIt was founded in 1903. They play at the Pittodrie Stadium in Aberdeen.\nIn the 1980s Sir Alex Ferguson was the manager of Aberdeen F.C. and they won the European Cup Winners Cup in 1983.\nCeltic F.C..\nThey were started in 1888. They play at Celtic Park in Glasgow. They are rivals with Rangers F.C..\nCeltic were the first British team to win the European Champion Clubs' Cup. Celtic did this in 1967. The final of the European Champion Clubs' Cup was in Lisboniure6f4y68uy746ghuthguyfu43678hgdjhdfuiy8974yrtouihdshfjhy\nHibernian F.C..\nHibernian Football Club were founded in 1875. They play in the Scottish capital of Edinburugh at Easter Road Stadium. Hibernian or, \"The Hibees\" play in green and white shirts with white shorts and stokings. A traditionally Catholic team, they play in the Scottish Premiere League, or SPL.\n\"Glory glory to The Hibees,\nGlory glory to the Hibees,\nAnd The Hibs go marching on!\"\nRangers F.C..\nRangers Football Club were formed in 1873 and are the most successful football team in world football history reaching an unprecedented fifty one league titles in the 2004/2005 season. Rangers achieved European success in 1972; they won the European Cup Winners Cup. Overall they have won over a hundred major trophies throughout their history. Ranger's play their rivals Celtic F.C. in the famous \"Old Firm Derby\".\nRangers home ground is Ibrox Stadium which is in Glasgow, Scotland.\nScottish Division One.\nDundee F.C..\nIn June 1893, Dundee Football Club was formed by an amalgamation of two city teams, Our Boys and East End. Dundee have played at Dens Park Stadium since 19th August 1899. Dundee became the Champions of Scotland on 28th April 1962 for the first and only time to date. Dundee have also won the Scottish Cup once, in 1910."}
{"id": "3054", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3054", "title": "List of French football teams", "text": "These are some French football (soccer) teams."}
{"id": "3057", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3057", "title": "1967", "text": "1967 (MCMLXVII) was ."}
{"id": "3058", "revid": "5906010", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3058", "title": "List of German football teams", "text": "These are the German football teams and the leagues they played in for the 2013/14 season (1st to third league). The highest German league is the Bundesliga (First Division). Below it is the second \"Bundesliga\" (Second Division). The Third Division is called 3. Liga. The Fourth Division, called \"Regionalliga\" is split into a northern, a southern and a western part. The northern part is called \"Regionalliga Nord\", the southern part \"Regionalliga S\u00fcd\" and the western part \"Regionalliga West\"."}
{"id": "3059", "revid": "6646401", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3059", "title": "List of Italian football teams", "text": "These are some Italian football teams that are or have been in the past years in the main professional division (Serie A)."}
{"id": "3060", "revid": "7531345", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3060", "title": "List of Spanish football teams", "text": "These are the Spanish football (soccer) teams and the leagues they played in for the 2014/15 season."}
{"id": "3061", "revid": "507729", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3061", "title": "Welsh League", "text": "The Welsh League is a football league in Wales. Some large Welsh clubs play in England's Football League.\nThese are the Welsh football (soccer) teams that played in the Welsh League for the 2003/04 season:"}
{"id": "3064", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3064", "title": "Arsenal F.C.", "text": "Arsenal Football Club is an English football club based in London that currently plays in the English Premier League.\nHistory.\nThe club was founded in 1886 and was originally called Dial Square F.C. named after a sundial on the side of a factory. The team plays in a traditional red and white kit. They played at Highbury in North London from 1913 - 2006, but now they play at the Emirates Stadium. The current captain of the side is Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. Their biggest rivals are Tottenham Hotspur, and the two play against each other in what is called the North London Derby.\nArsenal have won the First Division and Premier League 13 times and the FA Cup 10 times. They are the only British club to have been the subject of a feature film.\nThe Evelina approach was the main reason Arsenal were able to achieve this, first implemented by manager Arsene Wenger.\nArsenal are also the team who have gone the longest in the Premier League without being relegated. They were last relegated during WW1 over 90 years ago.\n1996\u20132018: The Wenger years.\nArsenal changed a lot under the management of Ars\u00e8ne Wenger, who was appointed in 1996. Attacking football, an overhaul of dietary and fitness practices, and efficiency with money\nhave defined his reign. Buying key players from Wenger's homeland, like Patrick Vieira and Thierry Henry, Arsenal won a second League and Cup double in 1997\u201398 and a third in 2001\u201302. In addition, the club reached the final of the 1999\u20132000 UEFA Cup, won in both the 2003 and 2005 FA Cups, and won the Premier League in 2003\u201304 without losing a single match, which earned the side the nickname \"The Invincibles\". This latter feat came within a run of 49 league matches unbeaten from 7 May 2003 to 24 October 2004, a national record.\nArsenal finished in either first or second place in the league in eight of Wenger's first nine seasons at the club, although on no occasion were they able to retain the title.\nThe club had never gotten beyond the quarter-finals of the Champions League until 2005\u201306; in that season they became the first club from London in the competition's fifty-year history to reach the final, in which they were beaten 2\u20131 by Barcelona. In July 2006, they moved into the Emirates Stadium, after 93 years at Highbury.\nThe club had not gained a trophy since the 2005 FA Cup until, led by then club-record signing Mesut \u00d6zil, Arsenal beat Hull City in the 2014 FA Cup Final, coming back from 2\u20130 to win the match 3\u20132.\nA year later, Arsenal completed another victorious FA Cup campaign, and became the most successful club in the tournament's history by winning their 13th FA Cup in 2016\u201317. However, in that same season, Arsenal finished in the fifth position in the league, the first time they had finished outside the top four since Wenger arrived in 1996. After another average league season the following year, Wenger departed Arsenal on 13 May 2018.\nSince 2018: Post-Wenger era.\nAfter transforming the club's operating model to occur with Arsene Wenger leaving, Basque-Spaniard Unai Emery was named as the club's new head coach on 23 May 2018. In Emery's first season, Arsenal finished fifth in the Premier League and as runner-up in the Europa League. On 29 November 2019, Emery was sacked and former player and assistant first team coach Freddie Ljungberg was appointed as interim head-coach.\nOn 20 December 2019, Arsenal appointed former midfielder and club captain Mikel Arteta as the new head coach. Arsenal finished the league season in eighth, their lowest finish since 1994\u201395, but beat Chelsea 2\u20131 to earn a record-extending 14th FA Cup title. After the season, Arteta's title was changed from head coach to manager. On 18 April 2021, Arsenal were announced as a founding club of the breakaway European competition The Super League; they withdrew from the competition two days later amid near-universal criticism. Arsenal finished the season in 8th place once again, and with no European competition next season for the first time in 26 years.\nManaging.\nThe current manager of Arsenal is Mikel Arteta. The assistant manager is Fredrik Ljungberg. Their new Emirates Stadium was opened on the 27th of October 2006, by Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Arsenal also has a women's team called Arsenal Ladies F.C.. The ladies team is the only team in women's football history to have ever won four trophies in one season. The most famous, and successful, Arsenal manager before Wenger is thought to be Herbert Chapman. Chapman won the First Division with Arsenal twice and the FA Cup once."}
{"id": "3065", "revid": "7866959", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3065", "title": "Aston Villa F.C.", "text": "Aston Villa Football Club (nicknamed Villa), is an English football club based in Birmingham. They have played at Villa Park, in Aston, since 1897. They were one of the teams that started the English Football League in 1888. They were also one of the teams that started the Premier League in 1992. They are one of five English clubs to have won the European Cup. They won this in 1982. They have also won the Football League First Division seven times, the FA Cup seven times, the League Cup five times, and the European Super Cup once.\nVilla have a large rivalry with nearby team Birmigham City. This is called the Second City Derby, and they have been playing against each other since 1879. The team's main home colours are claret and light blue. Their badge is a yellow lion. The club is owned by the NWSE group (owned by Egyptian Nassef Sawiris) and American Wes Edens.\nClub honours.\nAston Villa have won European and domestic league trophies. The club's last English trophy was in 1996 when they won the League Cup, and most recently they won the 2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup."}
{"id": "3066", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3066", "title": "Birmingham City F.C.", "text": "Birmingham City Football Club, is an English football club.\nThe club play in the Championship, their current manager is Gary Monk. Their home ground is St.Andrews"}
{"id": "3067", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3067", "title": "Blackburn Rovers F.C.", "text": "Blackburn Rovers F.C. is an English football club. They play at Ewood Park, which is in Blackburn, Lancashire. The manager of the club is Tony Mowbray.\nHistory.\nBlackburn Rovers won the FA Premier League once in the 1994/1995 season. However, in 1999, they were relegated."}
{"id": "3068", "revid": "7750977", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3068", "title": "Bolton Wanderers F.C.", "text": "Bolton Wanderers F.C. is an English football club. It is based 15 miles north of Manchester. The club plays in the English football league 1, the third tier league in England. Their home is the University of Bolton Stadium. It holds around 28,723 people. Their manager is Ian Evett. At home they play in a white shirt, navy blue shorts &amp; white socks. Away they play in a navy blue shirt, white shorts and navy blue socks."}
{"id": "3069", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3069", "title": "Charlton Athletic F.C.", "text": "Charlton Athletic Football Club, is an English football club.\nThe club plays in the Football League One."}
{"id": "3070", "revid": "1112432", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3070", "title": "Chelsea F.C.", "text": "Chelsea F.C. is an English football club that plays in the English Premier League. Their home stadium is Stamford Bridge in Fulham, London.\nChelsea is considered to be one of the most successful clubs of England, having won many trophies, including 6 Premier League, 2 UEFA Champions League, 2 UEFA Europa League, 5 League Cup, 8 FA Cup, 1 UEFA Super Cup and 2 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup titles. Their all-time highest goalscorer is Frank Lampard and their most successful goalkeeper (on the basis of clean sheets and titles statistics) is Petr \u010cech. Chelsea is owned by the Russian billionaire businessman Roman Abramovich.\nThere was a supposed breakaway European Super League that Chelsea were apart of but this quickly collapsed as many English teams pulled out due to fan disagreement. Chelsea were the first of the English teams to pull out after Chelsea fans protested outside of the stadium before their match against Brighton.\nHistory.\nChelsea started in 1905 and played the second division of the league. They won their first trophy in 1955, when they became Champions of the First Division. They won the FA Cup in 1970, 1997, 2000 and 2007. They won the League Cup in 1965, 1998, 2005 and 2007. In 1970s Chelsea failed to maintain their position of the first division, due to the financial difficulties. In 1990s they challenged the title of Premier League. They came close but did not win it until 2005 and 2006.\nIn 2003 the Russian billionaire, Roman Abramovich, purchased Chelsea and invested lots of capital to employ new football players. He also hired Luiz Felipe Scolari as the manager of the club. Abramovich also employed Peter Kenyon as the chief executive to be responsible for the commercial strategies of the club. This made Chelsea stronger, and they won the Premier League in consecutive years. A third straight FA Premier League title slipped through Chelsea's fingertips after their failure to defeat Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium, meaning that Manchester United had won their ninth league title in fifteen tries.\nOn September 20, 2007, the very successful manager Jos\u00e9 Mourinho left the club by \"mutual consent\". This exit came just days after a shockingly poor performance which saw them barely scrape out a 1-1 draw in a Champions League tie against Norwegian side Rosenborg B.K.. Following Mourinho's exit, Chelsea made Director of Football Avram Grant, the former manager of Israel from 2002 to 2006, the new manager of the club, until May 2008. Grant took over with Chelsea trailing in the Premier League \"title race\" behind Manchester United and Arsenal, and managed to keep Chelsea in the hunt for the league until the last game of the season. He got Chelsea into the Champions League Final for the first time as well as the Carling Cup Final, but he was sacked at the end of the season, along with assistant Henk ten Cate. Grant was sacked from the job after he lost in the final in a 5-6 penalty shootout loss to Manchester United and replaced by Luiz Felipe Scolari, the then-Portugal coach, in August. However, after a poor run of results Scolari was sacked on February 9, 2009. Guus Hiddink took over the club until the rest of the season. In early June they played in the FA Cup final against Everton, where Chelsea won 2-1, after Frank Lampard and Didier Drogba scored goals. In that final, Louis Saha of Everton scored the fastest goal in FA Cup history, in 25 seconds. A week later, the former Milan manager Carlo Ancelotti was named as the new manager of Chelsea. Antonio Conte was their manager until July 2018 and helped them win the 2016/17 league title. Frank Lampard, former Chelsea player, became Chelsea F.C.'s successor manager. He was sacked in mid-season of 2020/21 following series of poor performances. Thomas Tuchel replaced him, and successfully took Chelsea to the finals of UEFA Champions League 2020/21, played against Manchester City, held in Istanbul, Turkey. Chelsea won the final 1-0, with the winning goal scored by Kai Havertz.\nFirst-Team Squad.\n "}
{"id": "3071", "revid": "7820304", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3071", "title": "Everton F.C.", "text": "Everton Football Club are an English football club from the city of Liverpool. The club currently competes in the Premier League and have played more seasons in the top league of English football than any other team.\nEverton were founded in 1878. They have a long rivalry with Liverpool, mostly because both clubs have their home grounds in the same city. When they play each other, the match is known as the \"Merseyside derby\". \nIn the 1890s Everton played at Anfield, which later became Liverpool's stadium. However, the owner of the stadium increased the rent by a lot, so the club decided to stop paying and leave and build their own instead. Everton were then moved to a new stadium called Goodison Park.\nHistory.\n Everton started out in 1878 with the name St Domingo's FC. At first it was only for people who went to St Domingo's church, but so many people were interested they let people from the local area join as well. A year later the club was renamed Everton Football Club, after the area. Everton's first ever match was against a team called St Peter's in 1879. Everton won 6-0.\nEverton entered the FA Cup in the 1886/87 season. They were beaten 1-0 by Rangers in the first round. As football became more and more popular around England, the clubs realised they needed an organised league. In 1888 the Football League was founded. Everton were one of the 12 founding members. Preston North End won the first two leagues and Everton won the third in 1891. They won their second ever trophy, the FA Cup, in 1905 but did not win another until 1916. It was not until 1927 that Everton had their first period of long success. In 1925 they signed Dixie Dean and in 1927 he scored 60 goals in 39 games, setting a new world record and taking Everton to another league title. Everton were relegated to the second division in 1930/1931. Within a year they were promoted again, and remained in the first division until they were relegated again in 1950/51 (which resulted in three seasons in the second tier). This makes them the English football team with the second most consecutive seasons in the top league of English football, behind Arsenal who have been in the top flight continuously since 1919/20.\nEverton's second successful period came after 1961 when Harry Catterick was appointed manager. With Catterick in charge Everton won two league titles and four cups between 1961 and 1970. This success did not last however, and after three years of low league finishes Catterick quit his job. The club finished in mid-table positions for the rest of the 1970s with a line of unsuccessful managers. In 1981 the club appointed Howard Kendall to be the new manager. He turned Everton around and eventually became the most successful manager in the clubs history, winning two league titles and three cups between 1981 and 1987. This era also brought Everton's one and only European title, the Cup Winners Cup in 1985. They won the final 3-1 against Rapid Vienna of Austria. The semi final saw Everton beat German champions Bayern Munich 3-1, a match voted the greatest of all time at Goodison Park. \nIn 1985 several Liverpool and Juventus fans died when the crowd started fighting at a stadium in Heysel, Belgium. UEFA decided that Liverpool fans were mainly to blame. Because of this all English clubs were not allowed to play against European teams until 1991. This denied Everton the chance to defend their European title and the team gradually broke up. Many of their best players left to other European clubs. \nThe club did not do very well in the early 90s. They nearly got relegated twice and went through lots of money problems. However they still became one of the first members of the new English Premier League when it started in 1992. They were quite successful under manager Joe Royle, who took over in 1994. In his second season in charge he kept Everton clear of relegation and won the FA cup, the club's first trophy in seven years. The club had steady improvement under Royle, finishing 6th and 7th in the 1996 and 1997 seasons.\nAfter two seasons however the club's performance went downhill and Kendall was sacked after barely avoiding relegation in the 1998-99 season. Former player Walter Smith took over for three seasons, but failed to perform well. He spent a lot of money on players but didn't lead the team to good league positions. David Moyes took over in 2002 and has been one of the club's most successful managers to date. Under his management Wayne Rooney was brought into the first team and he was quickly sold to Manchester United for \u00a328 million, a club record fee. Moyes later broke the transfer record again in 2008 with the signing of Marouane Fellaini.\nMoyes led Everton to a 4th place finish in the 2004\u201305 season, their best finish ever. Since 2006 Everton have enjoyed regular top 10 finishes and reached the last 16 of the UEFA Cup in 2007 and were runner-ups in the 2009 FA Cup final. From the 2006-07 season until the 2012\u201313 season, which was the last season that Moyes was in charge, Everton placed in the top 8 positions.\nAt the end of the 2012\u201313 season Moyes left the club for Manchester United. He had managed Everton for 11 years. Moyes was replaced by Roberto Mart\u00ednez. Martinez led Everton to the semi-finals of the EFL Cup and the FA Cup in 2015\u201316. However, he was sacked with two games left in the season due to poor performances.\nHe was replaced in the summer of 2016 by Ronald Koeman. In his first season at the club, he guided them to the group stages of the Europa League, after finishing 7th in the previous Premier League season. He was sacked the following season after leaving the club in the relegation zone.\nKit.\nEverton usually wear Royal blue shirts with white shorts and white socks.\nThey wore many different kit colours in their first few years. At first, they wore white shorts and white shirts with blue stripes. However, many players who moved to Everton still wore the shirts of their old team, so things were confusing. To solve this the club introduced an all black kit to the club, as black dye was cheap and easily available. However many fans thought this was boring and morbid so a red band was added across the chest.\nIt was not until the 1901/02 season that the colours of royal blue and white were first introduced. This kit has stayed, with a few small changes, almost exactly the same from then until the present day. In 1986, a white hoop was added to the chest, but the fans did not like this at all and it was quickly changed back again.\nSponsors &amp; Manufacturers.\nEverton's current shirt sponsor is Cazoo. They are a British online car retailer based in London, England . Previous shirt sponsors included: Chang Beer (2004-17), Kejian (2002-04), mobile network operator One2one (1997-2002), Printer company Danka (1995-97), and electronics company NEC (1985-95). Everton were the first Premier League team to take off shirt sponsors from their child shirts because they did not like advertising alcohol to children.\nEverton's current kit manufacturers are Umbro. They have been the club's kit manufacturer three times previously (1974\u201383, 1986\u20132000, and 2004\u201309). Other previous manufacturers are Le Coq Sportif (1983\u201386, 2009\u201312), Puma (2000\u201304) and Nike (2012\u201314).\nNicknames &amp; Traditions.\nEverton take their name from the district of Everton in Liverpool where it was originally formed.\nEverton's nickname is the \"Toffees\", or sometimes the \"Toffeemen\". This comes from one of two toffee shops that were located in Everton village at the time the club was founded. Both Ye Anciente Everton Toffee House and Old Mother Nobletts Toffee Shop claim to have started off the nickname. At first Ye Anciente Everton Toffee House was very popular with fans because it was near to their stadium in the Everton district. Old Mother Nobletts Toffee Shop sold sweets called 'Everton mints', which proved even more popular. Faced with going out of business, Ye Anciente Everton Toffee House got a licence to throw free toffees to the crowd inside the ground before the match. This tradition continues even today. A teenage girl is chosen from the crowd to throw mints to the crowd before the match.\nAt other times in their history Everton have also been known as 'The Black Watch', 'The Blues' and, in the 1980s, 'The School of Science'.\nLike many Premier League football clubs, Everton's players walk out onto the pitch to a particular song at the beginning of every match. With Everton it is the theme tune to a 1960s television series called Z-Cars. Z-Cars was about police working in a made up town, which many people believed was based on real life Liverpool.\nStadium.\nWhen Everton were first created, they played at Anfield. The owner of the stadium put the rent up by so much the club decided to stop paying and leave and build their own instead. Everton then moved to their new stadium called Goodison Park, which was opened in 1892. They still play there today.\nEverton are currently planning a new stadium called , which is located at the Bramley-Moore Dock. It will have a capacity of 52,000, and will be completed in 2023 or 2024."}
{"id": "3072", "revid": "7640743", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3072", "title": "Fulham F.C.", "text": "Fulham Football Club is an English football club from London that currently plays in the EFL Championship in the 2021\u201322 season. It plays in a white shirt and black shorts for home games. For away games, it played in red shirts and white shorts in 2013/14, but has played in colours such as green, yellow or black. The team's away kit in 2014 is navy with orange sleeves. Shahid Khan owns the club. He is from the United States, and also owns the Jacksonville Jaguars, a famous NFL team.\nHistory.\nThe club was made in 1879 as Fulham St. Andrews. Lots of famous players used to play for Fulham, like Johnny Haynes (1950s), Bobby Moore (1970s), George Best (1970s) and Edwin van der Sar (2000s). Fulham have won one international tournament; the Intertoto Cup in 2003. They also were runner-up of the 2009-10 UEFA Europe League. They lost to Atletico Madrid in the final.\nWhen Mohamed Al-Fayed bought Fulham in 1997, it was in the 3rd division of English football (Football League One). He put lots of money into the club, and he made good choices about the club. The club won promotion two times, which means that in 2001 it was now in the top division of English Football, the Premier League.\nStadium.\nFulham's stadium is called Craven Cottage. It was built 100 years ago. It has a pretty building in one corner of the pitch, this is the \"Cottage\". The fans of Fulham like to call it \"The Cottage\", and it can have 27,000 people sitting in it.\nFrom 2002 to 2004, Fulham had to play at Loftus Road, which is the ground of Queens Park Rangers, near the BBC headquarters. This was because the club needed to renovate Craven Cottage because of new rules. The rules said that nobody can stand at football games, so the club had to install new seats.\nSome people who live near to Craven Cottage do not like having a big club near to them. They made it hard for the club to be allowed to make the changes. This is why the changes took a long time, even though it was easy work for the builders.\nBecause of the \"Cottage\", the club and its supporters are called \"The Cottagers\".\nNow.\nThe club plays in the Premier League, the top football league in England. The club is managed by Scott Parker in the 2020/21 season."}
{"id": "3075", "revid": "7854913", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3075", "title": "Liverpool F.C.", "text": "Liverpool Football Club () (originally, Everton Athletics in 1892) is a professional association football club based in Liverpool, Merseyside, England. They play in the Premier League, the top tier of English football. The club has won 6 European Cups, an English club record, 3 UEFA Cups, 4 UEFA Super Cups, 19 League titles (including 1 Premier League), 7 FA Cups, a record 8 EFL Cups, title and 1 FIFA Club World Cup title. Liverpool is the honorest English club with 48 official trophies in total. Liverpool's anthem is \"You'll Never Walk Alone\".\nHistory.\nLiverpool won their first League championship in 1901, and their second in 1906. They played their first FA Cup final in 1914, losing 1\u20130 to Burnley. The last domestic trophy they won was the EFL Cup in February 2012, after beating Cardiff City. They have also won the Champions League six times, the most of any British side. Their 5th success was in Istanbul in 2005. The game was won after Liverpool tied 3\u20133 with A.C. Milan, after being down 3\u20130 at half-time. The Reds then won the penalty shootout, partly due to goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek's saves. Their 6th and most recent success was in 2019 when they beat fellow Premier League club Tottenham Hotspur 2-0 in Madrid. Liverpool F.C. have won England's top football league 18 times. The club won the 2019-20 Premier League title, thirty years after their last first division title win in the 1989-90 season.\nLiverpool has had two tragedies in their history. The first was the Heysel Stadium disaster of 1985, which led to the death of 39 Juventus fans and the second was the Hillsborough disaster in 1989, which lead to the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans.\nHonours.\nClub captains.\nSince the establishment of the club in 1892, 45 players have been club captain of Liverpool F.C. Andrew Hannah became the first captain of the club after Liverpool separated from Everton and formed its own club. Alex Raisbeck, who was club captain from 1899 to 1909, was the longest serving captain before being overtaken by Steven Gerrard who served 12 seasons as Liverpool captain starting from the 2003\u201304 season. The present captain is Jordan Henderson, who in the 2015\u201316 season replaced Gerrard who moved to LA Galaxy."}
{"id": "3076", "revid": "1143767", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3076", "title": "Manchester City F.C.", "text": "Manchester City Football Club is an English football club. The club is coached by Pep Guardiola and the team is currently playing in the English Premier League.\nThe club plays in the Premier League and is owned by a royal family from Abu Dhabi. As of 1 September 2008 they are the richest club in the Premier League. They won the 2011\u201312 Premier League championship, their first in the top flight since the 1967\u201368 season. After finishing second in 2012\u201313, they won the Premier League championship again in 2013\u201314. Their current stadium is the Etihad Stadium (noncommercial name: City of Manchester Stadium). The stadium is part-owned by Manchester City Council, and could only be built on the understanding that Manchester City would take a tenancy after the 2006 Commonwealth Games, which the club agreed to do. The owner of Manchester City Sheik Mansour bought 200 million pounds.\nPlayers.\nCurrent squad.\n \nOut on loan.\nThe following players have previously made a league or cup appearance for Manchester City and are currently on loan at other teams:\nPlayer of the Year.\nSource:"}
{"id": "3077", "revid": "7886588", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3077", "title": "Manchester United F.C.", "text": "Manchester United Football Club (F.C.) is a football club that plays in the Premier League. They play their home games at Old Trafford which is in Greater Manchester.\nMatt Busby led the club to lots of success by using the youth players until the Munich air disaster in 1958, where many United footballers and staff died. Sir Alex Ferguson led the club to many titles, including the treble (Premier League, FA Cup, and Champions League), from 1986 to 2013, when he retired. The club has 3 UEFA Champions League titles, 20 league titles, 12 FA Cups, and a FIFA Club World Cup.\nHistory.\nManchester United are the most successful club in England and have won 20 league titles, which is more than any other team. They have also won 12 FA Cups and 3 European Cups.\nThe club started as Newton Heath L&amp;YR F.C. in 1878. All of the team worked at Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway depot at Newton Heath. After nearly closing in 1902, John Henry Davies took over and changed the club's name to Manchester United F.C.. Manchester United made Matt Busby their manager after World War II. Matt Busby used the youth team to get new players, and this was very successful. The club won the Football League in 1956 and 1957. The success was stopped by the Munich air disaster in 1958, when eight of the club's players died. It was thought that the club might close, but it did not. They won the Football League in 1965 and 1967, and the European Cup in 1968.\nSir Alex Ferguson era.\nIn 1986, manager Ron Atkinson was sacked by the club because they were in danger of being relegated. They brought in Sir Alex Ferguson. He did not win anything for the first couple of years.\nThe team won their first trophy under Ferguson, the 1990 FA Cup, against Crystal Palace in the replay after a 3-3 draw. The next season, United won the UEFA Cup Winners Cup. In 1993, Manchester United won the very first Premier League. In 1999, Manchester United won the treble, made of the Premier League, FA Cup, and UEFA Champions League. Manchester United won the league 7 times again until Sir Alex Ferguson retired after the 2012\u201313 season. From the 2006\u201307 season to the 2008\u201309 season, Man United won the league 3 times in a row. The club also won its third UEFA Champions League in 2008 against Chelsea F.C., and almost won the next season as well but lost to FC Barcelona in the final. They won their first FIFA Club World Cup in December 2008. \nRecent history.\n2013 - 2018.\nDavid Moyes was made manager in 2013. In April 2014, he was sacked by the club and club legend Ryan Giggs became player-manager (when a player is also the manager at the same time). They finished in 7th place. In 2014, Louis Van Gaal took over. He led United to a 4th-place finish. In 2015, after winning 3-0 against Sunderland, Man United reached 1st place for the first time in over two years. However, after losing 0-3 to Arsenal, they dropped to 3rd place. Van Gaal was sacked at the end of the season and Jos\u00e9 Mourinho replaced him. He then led the club to a League Cup and Europa League victory in the 2016\u201317 season. Mourinho was sacked in December 2018 because of poor results and replaced by Ole Gunnar Solskjaer.\n2018 - Present.\nSince Mourinho was fired in the middle of the season, United brought in a temporary manager for the rest of the season. A former player, Ole Gunnar Solksjaer moved from his position at Molde to manage Manchester United. Under Solksjaer, United won 14 of their remaining 19 games that season. This good run meant they qualified for UEFA Champions League that season. United made Solksjaer their permanent manager in March 2019.\nGrounds.\nThe Old Trafford became the club's home ground in 1909, and the stadium was constructed to a capacity of 77,000. In the Second World War, bombings damaged the stadium. While the stadium was being fixed, they played \"home\" games at Manchester City's Maine Road. The stadium was converted to an all-seater stadium in 1993 for safety reasons, but the capacity fell to 44,000. In 1995, expansions in the North Stand raised the capacity to 55,000. In the middle of 1999, the East and West Stands were expanded to give the stadium a capacity of 67,000. Then between 2005 and 2006 8,000 more seats were added to make a capacity of 75,000.\nRivalries.\nUnited has many rivalries including Liverpool, Manchester City, Leeds United and Arsenal. Their most intense rivalry is with \"The Citizens\" (Manchester City). This is because both clubs are from Manchester and each time they play against each other it is called the Manchester Derby."}
{"id": "3078", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3078", "title": "Middlesbrough F.C.", "text": "Middlesbrough Football Club, is an English football club. Their stadium is the Riverside Stadium.\nThe club plays in the Premier League. The manager is Neil Warnock."}
{"id": "3079", "revid": "7858187", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3079", "title": "Newcastle United F.C.", "text": "Newcastle United Football Club is an English football club in Newcastle upon Tyne. Newcastle play in the Premier League. In the 2008/09 season they were relegated after 16 years in the top flight, but won promotion back into the Premier League by winning the Football League Championship. In the 2015/16 season, they were relegated again.\nHistory.\nNewcastle United was formed in 1892 after the two rival clubs Newcastle West End and Newcastle East End grouped together. They have played their matches at the ground St.James' Park ever since. This ground holds 52,000 people, and is one of the biggest in England. It is located just inside the centre of Newcastle.\nNewcastle originally played in red shirts and white shorts. In fact, there was a kit clash in their very first League match, away to the then-named Woolwich Arsenal. The home side wore red, so Newcastle played in their change kit of black and white stripes. A permanent switch to black and white soon followed, most likely to reduce kit clashes, and perhaps as a further attempt to appease West End fans. The decision was taken in 1894, as the minutes from the club meeting reveal: \u2018It was agreed that the Club\u2019s colours should be changed from red shirts and white knickers to black and white shirts (two inch stripe) and dark knickers.\u2019.\nOn the 24th day of May 2009 which was also the last day of the season, Newcastle were relegated to the second tier of English football, the Coca-Cola Championship. They returned to the top flight of English football, winning the Championship in the 2009/10 season. In the 2010/11 season, they finished mid-table. The club then went on to finish 5th place in the 2011/12 season. \nOn 17 July 2019, former Sunderland manager Steve Bruce was made manager on a three-year contract. Bruce oversaw 13th and 12th placed finishes during his first two seasons in charge, both of which were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. On 7 October 2021, after 14 years as owner, Ashley sold the club to a new group of owners. The group was made up of Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund, RB Sports &amp; Media and PCP Capital Partners.\nThe club.\nTraditionally the loudest support for the club came from the Gallowgate End - a stand in St. James' Park. This stand is where Alan Shearer once used to watch Newcastle play when he was a child.\nThe record transfer fee the club has paid is \u00a317 million (around $30 million) for Michael Owen, in August 2005. Alan Shearer was the previous record transfer at \u00a315 million, which was also the world's largest transfer fee when he signed in 1996.\nThe Newcastle United's number 9 shirt is one of the most famous shirts in the world. Legends such as Hughie Gallacher, Malcolm McDonald, Jackie Milburn and Alan Shearer have worn the famous shirt."}
{"id": "3080", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3080", "title": "Portsmouth F.C.", "text": "Portsmouth F.C. is an English football club. They play in the Football League Two. Their home stadium is called Fratton Park.\nPortsmouth's manager is Kenny Jackett. The most famous manager was probably Harry Redknapp who took the team to an FA Cup victory in 2008 which subsequently got the team into the UEFA Europa League (then called the UEFA Cup) for the first time. The club has since been hit with financial problems and see themselves in the fourth tier of English football.\nThey have a big rivalry with a team called Southampton F.C. They are also from Hampshire.\nLeague position.\nFormer position.\n2014=- NOT RELEGATED"}
{"id": "3082", "revid": "7852362", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3082", "title": "Tottenham Hotspur F.C.", "text": "Tottenham Hotspur Football Club is an English football club. The club plays in the Premier League. Their current stadium is The Tottenham Hotspur Stadium in north London. The captain of Tottenham Hotspur is Hugo Lloris and vice-captain is Harry Kane. The club's most common nickname is Spurs. Other nicknames include The Lilywhites and occasionally \"Yid Army\".\nFamous Tottenham Hotspur players include Pat Jennings, Paul Gascoigne, Glenn Hoddle, Dave Mackay, Gary Lineker, Danny Blanchflower, Teddy Sheringham and Jimmy Greaves. They have many rivals in London, but their most famous rivals are Arsenal. Tottenham were the first winners of the UEFA Cup tournament, and the first team in the 20th century to achieve the league and cup double. In the 2016\u201317 Premier League, they finished in 2nd position and earned a place in the European Champions League."}
{"id": "3089", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3089", "title": "Drink driving", "text": ""}
{"id": "3095", "revid": "1081468", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3095", "title": "Derby County F.C.", "text": "Derby County Football Club is an English football club. The club plays in the Football League Championship.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe club was formed in 1884 by players from Derbyshire County Cricket Club who wanted something to do in the winter. They started out by playing at the Racecourse Ground, Derby.\nThe Rams, as Derby County are known, were one of the first members of The Football League when it started in 1888. Back in 1895 the club moved to a new stadium, The Baseball Ground. It was called this because baseball had been played there much earlier beforehand, and it became their home for the next 102 years. When they moved, Derby County had changed their club colours to the black and white they still use today at matches.\nIn 1898, Derby got to their first FA Cup final, but lost. The same happened again in 1899 and 1903. Derby's went down to the Football League's Second Division for the first time in 1907, but they came back up to the First Division in 1911.\nIn 1914, they were relegated again, but won the Second Division the next year to get promoted. World War I meant that they had to wait until 1919 to play First Division football again. After just two seasons, they were relegated yet again in 1921.\nAfter Derby's next promotion in 1926 the club got much better, and were one of the top teams from the late 1920s all the way through to the 1939-1940 season, which was interrupted when World War II broke out.\nFA Cup win.\nThe FA Cup restarted in the 1945-1946 season. Derby got to the final again, but this time they beat Charlton Athletic 4-1 to win the Cup. Some people had thought the reason Derby kept losing in the FA Cup was that they were cursed by gypsies, as the Baseball Ground was built on the site of a gypsy camp. Some players even thought so, and before the final they asked the gypsies to lift the curse.\nThe Football League began again the next season, but Derby did not play well and were relegated in 1953. Things went from bad to worse and in 1955 they were relegated to the Football League Third Division (North) for the first time in their history. Derby were too good for that league though, and finished second at the first try. Then they did even better next season by finishing first, and going back up to the top division.\nThe Clough years.\nIn 1967, Brian Clough took over Derby County with Peter Taylor helping him. Derby were back in Division Two, but Clough got them promoted to the First Division in 1969. He led them to their first ever Championship in 1972. Derby could not win the title again the next season, but they did get to the semi-finals of the European Cup, but they lost to Juventus. A lot of people in England thought after the match that the Italian club had paid money to the referee as a bribe. This was never proved. Clough left the club after an argument with Derby's chairman Sam Longson. Clough later became manager of Nottingham Forest F.C., where he went on to win a First Division championship and two European Cups.\nAfter Clough.\nDerby won the league again in 1974-1975, this time with Dave Mackay as manager. He used to play for the club, as captain, under Clough. When Mackay left in 1976, Derby got slowly worse until they went down in 1980.\nDerby's stay in the Second Division was not a happy one and they were relegated to the Football League Third Division in 1984. It was exactly 100 years since the club formed, and just nine years after their last Championship.\nThe club made Arthur Cox manager. After a two-year stay in the Third Division, they were promoted to the Second Division. They won that league the next year, going back up to the First Division in 1987.\nThe club managed to finish 5th in 1989, but it was owned by businessman Robert Maxwell, who was having money problems. He stopped spending money on new players, and sold the club not long before his death. The club was relegated back to the Second Division in 1991 (which changed its name to the First Division a year later when the First Division clubs left to form the FA Premier League).\nJim Smith became Derby's manager in 1995. Before the end of the season, Smith took the Rams up to the Premier League for the first time.\nBack to the Premier League and relegation to the Championship.\nDerby County did well in the 1996-97 season, finishing 12th in the final table with international players like Aljosa Asanovic and Igor Stimac playing well. The club moved into the new 33,000-seat Pride Park Stadium for the 1997-98 season, and went on to finish ninth. Next year they did even better, finishing eighth, but the season after that Derby struggled, and finished 16th. Another bad season followed in 2000-01, as Derby finished 17th in the Premiership - just one place clear of going down.\nJim Smith left the club in October 2001 and his assistant manager Colin Todd took over. He kept his job for just 3 months before he was sacked. At the end of January 2002, John Gregory got the manager's job. Derby started well, but then lost seven of their last eight matches and were relegated again after six seasons in a row in the Premiership.\nIt was a bad time to go down. Money owed to the Football League teams by the TV company ITV Digital was never paid, and Derby were one of the clubs to suffer worst. They had to sell their best players and rebuild a team with mostly very young players. They finished 18th after a difficult season. In late March, Gregory was suspended and George Burley came in as a temporary manager. At the end of the season Gregory was sacked and Burley took over fully. Owner Lionel Pickering lost control of the club and a new board of John Sleightholme, Jeremy Keith and Steve Harding came in. Derby finished 20th in the 2003-2004 First Division campaign, but did much better in the 2004-05 season and finished 4th in the Division which was now called the Football League Championship. This meant they won a promotion play-off spot, but lost in the semi-finals to Preston North End. Soon after losing, Burley left. Derby then employed Phil Brown for a short period who was then replaced by the Academy Coach, Terry Westley, who kept the club up in the 2005-06 season.\nBefore the final game of the 2005-06 season a local consortium led by Peter Gadsby, took over the Rams and gave the manager's job to Billy Davies, who left Preston after compensation was agreed by both clubs for his services. The new changes and fresh activity in the transfer market promise a bright future for this founder member of the football league.\nFollowing a poor start to the 2007-2008 season which saw Derby achieve just one win in 14 matches Billy Davies left Derby County FC. Derby were promoted to the Premier League after defeating West Bromwich Albion 1-0 in the finals of the promotion playoffs.\nFamous players.\nMany people think the best Rams player ever was Steve Bloomer, one of the highest scoring players in the history of English football. He played for Derby from the late 19th century to just before the First World War. Other top players include the FA Cup winners Peter Doherty, Jackie Stamps and Raich Carter. In more recent years players like Roy McFarland, Archie Gemmill, Colin Todd, Kevin Hector, Steve Powell, Ron Webster, Alan Hinton and Dave Mackay played in the championship winning sides. More recently, the England goalkeeper Peter Shilton, Stefano Eranio and Igor Stimac all played for the Rams. Bobby Davison was also a favourite of Rams fans. Recent famous players also include locally born Matthew Debyshire who has achieved some degree or recognition at Blackburn Rovers but has expressed desire to play a more successful clubs like Tottenham Hotspurs.\nLocal rivals.\nDerby County's main rivals are Nottingham Forest, who are based in Nottingham, a city just a few miles north-east of Derby. Leicester City, also based in the East Midlands, come a close second. Fans from the north of Derbyshire often dislike Sheffield Wednesday or Leeds United."}
{"id": "3097", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3097", "title": "Ipswich Town F.C.", "text": "Ipswich Town Football Club (Ipswich Town) is an English football club. It is based in Ipswich, Suffolk county. The club was founded in 1878. The club's home stadium is Portman Road.\nIpswich Town currently play in the EFL League One, having been relegated from the EFL Championship in 2019, after 17 years in the division. The club has won the Football League First Division once, in 1962 and the FA Cup in 1978. They have also been successful in European football. They won the UEFA Cup in 1981. The current chairman of the club is Mike O'Leary. The current manager is Paul Cook. Two of the club's previous managers have gone on to manage the England national football team, and one has gone on to manage the Scotland national football team. A notable previous manager is Roy Keane, a legend for Ireland and Manchester United.\nHistory.\nIpswich Town F.C. was started as an amateur team in 1878 and was called \"Ipswich A.F.C.\" The club played a lot of games in the local area and won several cup competitions. In 1936, they became a professional club and joined a league called the \"Southern League\" which they won in their first season. In 1938, they were elected to join The Football League and played in \"Division Three (South)\" until the end of the 1954 season, when they were promoted to \"Division Two\".\nIn 1961, Ipswich Town won their division and were promoted to the highest level of English football, \"Division One\". The club went on to win this division the next season. This let them play in European football competition, The European Cup the following season. Two years later,they were sent back to \"Division Two\" where they stayed for four years before being promoted to \"Division One\" again, in 1968. Soon after, Bobby Robson became the manager of the club and led them to success in both English and European football. In 1978 Ipswich won the FA Cup at Wembley Stadium, beating Arsenal F.C. 1\u20130. Further success came in 1981 when Ipswich defeated Dutch team AZ Alkmaar.\nBobby Robson was asked to become manager of the England national football team in 1982 so he left the club. Ipswich did not do well in the following seasons and were relegated to \"Division Two\" in 1986. They remained here until 1993 when they won the division and promotion into the new English Premier League. Two poor seasons followed, including a 9\u20130 defeat by Manchester United, still the biggest defeat in Premier League history. In 1995 Ipswich were relegated once again and stayed in second division of English football until they were promoted in 2000 after they beat Barnsley in the play-offs at Wembley 4\u20132.\nIn their first season in the Premier League, Ipswich finished fifth; This meant they qualified to play in the UEFA Cup the next season. Although the club played well in the European competition, they were poor in the Premier League. They finished bottom and were relegated to Division One, now called Football League Championship. Ipswich were relegated to League One after the 18/19 season, finishing last in the championship.\nColours and crest.\nOne of Ipswich Town's nicknames is \"The Blues\". This is because the traditional kit the players wear is usually mostly blue. When Ipswich play against other teams who also wear blue, they change to an alternative kit, sometimes called an \"away\" kit. The \"away\" kit has been different colours including orange, white, red and black vertical stripes. Currently, the away kit is plain white.\nThe crest which is on the shirts and shorts of the kit shows a horse, with one hoof resting on a football. Underneath the horse is a river\u2014this represents the River Orwell which flows through the town.\nStadium.\nIpswich Town play their home games at a stadium called Portman Road. The club started playing games here in 1884. The stadium can hold over 30,000 people. Outside the ground there are statues of both Bobby Robson and Sir Alf Ramsey.\nIn 2003, England played a game against Croatia at Portman Road. England won the game 3\u20131. The England youth team has also played at the stadium several times.\nOther sports have been played at Portman Road, including athletics, hockey and American football. The stadium has also been used for events other than sports. It has been used for concerts by Elton John, R.E.M., Red Hot Chili Peppers, and Rod Stewart.\nSupporters.\nLocal fans call the team \"Town\" because it is a shortened version of the team name. Some people also call Ipswich the \"Tractor Boys\". This nickname is used a lot by newspapers. Many Ipswich fans use this name as a joke rather than letting it be an insult.\nThe main rival of Ipswich Town is Norwich City who are based in Norfolk. When these two teams play, the game is called the \"East Anglian derby\". The derby is usually referred to as the 'Old Farm' derby, a take on the 'Old Firm' derby played in Scotland between Glasgow Celtic and Glasgow Rangers (now 'The Rangers').\nRecords.\nMick Mills holds the record for Ipswich league appearances. He played 591 matches between 1966 and 1982. The club's top league goalscorer is Ray Crawford, who scored 203 goals between 1958 and 1969. Ted Phillips holds the record for the most goals scored in a season, 41 in the 1956\u201357 season. Allan Hunter has played the most international games while at the club, making 47 appearances for Northern Ireland.\nThe club's widest victories in the league have been their 7\u20130 wins against Portsmouth in 1964, against Southampton in 1974 and against West Bromwich Albion in the First Division in 1976. Their biggest defeats in the league were 10\u20131 against Fulham in 1963 and 9\u20130 against Manchester United in 1995.\nThe highest number of people to watch Ipswich at Portman Road is 38,010 for a sixth round FA Cup match against Leeds United on 8 March 1975.\nThe largest amount of money received for an Ipswich player is \u00a36.5\u00a0million, from Newcastle United for Kieron Dyer in July 1999. The most the club has spent on a player was \u00a34.75\u00a0million for Matteo Sereni from Sampdoria in July 2001.\nManagers.\nPaul Cook is the current manager of Ipswich Town, replacing Paul Lambert. Lambert joined Ipswich Town in October 2018, after Paul Hirst was fired 2 days before. Lambert's previous job was Stoke City in the Premier League, where he spent 4 months in charge.\nTwo managers of Ipswich Town have gone on to become the manager of the England national football team. The first was Sir Alf Ramsey. He also won the World Cup for England in 1966. The second was Sir Bobby Robson who got England to the semi-finals of the 1990 World Cup finals. George Burley became manager of the Scotland national football team in January 2008, for 22 months.\nHonours.\nIpswich Town won the top division once (when it was called Division One) in 1962. The club has won the FA Cup once, in 1978, when they defeated Arsenal F.C. 1\u20130. The club has also won the UEFA Cup once in 1981."}
{"id": "3106", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3106", "title": "Sunderland A.F.C.", "text": "Sunderland Association Football Club is an English football club. They are from the city of Sunderland.\nThe club played in the Premier League in the 2005/2006 season, they finished bottom. They played in the Football League Championship in 2006/2007, but were promoted back to the Premiership for 2007/08 under manager Roy Keane.\nSunderland AFC were created in 1879 and joined the Football League in 1891. They have won the league six times. The last time Sunderland won the league was in 1936. Sunderland have won the FA Cup two times, in 1937 and 1973.\nFor 99 years, Sunderland played their home games at Roker Park. In 1997 they moved, and now play their home games at the Stadium of Light. The stadium holds 49,000 people.\nThe team's most recent promotion to the English Premier League was in 2007, and they are now, in 2015/16, in their ninth season in a row in this division. They have had three different managers in 2013. Martin O'Neill was fired at the end of March and Paolo Di Canio became manager. He was fired in September after the team had bad results, and Gus Poyet replaced him on October 8th."}
{"id": "3109", "revid": "7630632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3109", "title": "West Bromwich Albion F.C.", "text": "West Bromwich Albion Football Club (West Brom, WBA) is an English football club. The club plays in the Championship. Their home stadium is called the Hawthorns. \nAlbion were one of the founding members of The Football League in 1888 and have spent the majority of their existence in the top tier of English football. They have been champions of England once, in 1919\u201320, but have had more success in the FA Cup, with five wins. The first came in 1888, the year the league was founded, and the most recent in 1968, their last major trophy. They also won the Football League Cup at the first attempt in 1966. The club's longest consecutive period in the top division was between 1949 and 1973, and from 1986 to 2002 they spent their longest ever period out of the top division. The 2011\u201312 season will be their sixth season in the Premier League since 2002. The Hawthorns is a stadium on a hill."}
{"id": "3110", "revid": "1081468", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3110", "title": "West Ham United F.C.", "text": "West Ham United Football Club is an English football club.\nThe club plays in the Premier League. It was started in 1895 and its home stadium is the London stadium East London. The club is also called \"the Hammers\" and \"the Irons\" because it was started in a London Ironworks. Their main rivals are Millwall and other rivals are Tottenham Hotspur, Chelsea and Arsenal \nWest ham currently are managed by David Moyes, their former care-taker manager for the 2017/18 season in Premier League."}
{"id": "3111", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3111", "title": "Wigan Athletic F.C.", "text": "Wigan Athletic Football Club is an English football club from Wigan, Greater Manchester. The club plays in the Championship, currently managed by Owen Coyle. They play their home games at the DW Stadium. In 2012-13 they won the FA Cup by beating Manchester City 1-0 and so they played in the UEFA Europa League in the season 2013/14. A few days later they were relegated from the English Premier League to the Football League Championship, becoming the first FA Cup-winning side to be relegated in the same season. Manager Roberto Mart\u00ednez left the club shortly after to join Everton. Owen Coyle replaced him.\nSupporters.\nWigan Athletic Official Supporters Club (formally known as Wigan Athletic Supporters Travel Club) is the official supporters' association of Wigan Athletic Football Club. The supporters club are a non-profit organisation run by volunteers and meet before home matches in the South Stand Bar.\nRivalries.\nSince Wigan Athletic's admission to the Football League in 1978, the club has built up several rivalries, mainly with Bolton Wanderers. They also have a rivalry with Manchester City, because they are from the same city and have the same blue club color.\nManagers.\nAs listed on the official Wigan Athletic website.\nHonours.\nCup.\nWigan's victory in the 2013 FA Cup Final qualified them for European football for the first time, earning them an automatic place in the group stage of the 2013\u201314 UEFA Europa League."}
{"id": "3112", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3112", "title": "Wimbledon F.C.", "text": "Wimbledon Football Club was an English football club. The club began in Wimbledon in 1889. In 2002 it moved to Milton Keynes and it 2004 it changed its name to Milton Keynes Dons F.C. Many football fans in Wimbledon did not agree with the move. They decided to start a new club there, which is called AFC Wimbledon.\nThe club played in the English Football League and won the FA Cup in 1988. It was a professional football club, which means that the players get paid to play.\nFirst move: out of Wimbledon.\nIn 1992, the club decided that its ground at Plough Lane was too small and moved away from Wimbledon to Selhurst Park in Croydon. This ground is owned by Crystal Palace F.C.. They stayed there for the next 12 years.\nSecond move: out of London, to Milton Keynes.\nIn 2002, the club's owners decided that they wanted to move the club out of London. Nobody really knows why they wanted to move. They said that there were too many clubs in London, that not enough people were coming to watch the matches. This meant that they did not collect enough money at the gate to pay everyone and that is why they could not afford to stay. They looked at Cardiff and Dublin before deciding to move to Milton Keynes. Milton Keynes is a new city that is 45 miles (or 75 kilometres) north of London. When they said what they wanted to do, most of their fans stopped paying to see matches, which meant that they had even less money to pay everyone.\nBefore the move could happen, they had to get permission from the Football Association (the FA). The FA is the association of all the football clubs in England. The clubs elect a Committee to decide what to do about things. Most things they have to decide are easy but this was not easy to decide. Or maybe they knew what to decide but did not want to be the ones to decide it. So they asked three clever men to study the problem and tell them what would be best to do. These three men said that the club should be allowed to move. \nSome members of the Committee did not like this decision and tried to stop it. But the owners of Wimbledon F.C. said that they would get a judge to decide (in a court) if anyone tried to stop them. It costs a lot of money to go to court and whoever loses has to pay for everybody. The other clubs would not agree to pay if this happened, so the FA had to disagree the move.\nBut it was already too late for the owners of Wimbledon F.C. They had no money left. They had borrowed money from the bank to keep going but now the bank wanted its money back. When you cannot pay back what you borrow, this is called \"going bankrupt\" and that is what happened. Luckily (or unluckily, depends on your point of view), the group in Milton Keynes that first wanted them to come, still wanted them. So this group paid back some of the money and in 2002, the club moved to Milton Keynes. They began playing in the National Hockey Stadium, beside Milton Keynes Central railway station and stayed there for two years until their new stadium was ready (2006). \nMany football fans around England did not like the idea that a club could move. They believe that a club belongs to a town and it is not like a furniture shop that closes down in one town and opens in another town. Another reason that they did not like it is that they would love to see their own club get into the Football League. The only way that they can do that is if they win their regional league, then win the Football Conference. So they felt that Milton Keynes was \"jumping the queue\" to get into the League. Because of this, many fans refused to attend (\"boycotted\") any games they played\nMilton Keynes.\nIn 2004, the new owners changed the name to 'Milton Keynes Dons F.C.' (usually just 'MK Dons'), which combined the name of their new home ('Milton Keynes') with the nickname ('Dons') from Wimbledon. With this, Wimbledon FC ceased to exist.\nBut the boycott continued. In 2006, the Football Fans Federation proposed a way forward. The most important thing for the town of Wimbledon was the trophies (cups, shields) that the club had won when it was called Wimbledon F.C. The agreement was that Milton Keynes Dons F.C. would give these trophies to Merton Borough Council, which is the local government area that contains Wimbledon. The league history of Milton Keynes Dons F.C. would start from 2004 which is when they changed their name. The Fans Federation would ask fans to end the boycott. Everybody agreed and this is what has happened. "}
{"id": "3160", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3160", "title": "Accrington Stanley F.C.", "text": "Accrington Stanley Football Club is an English football club.\nThe club will play in League Two (the English fourth division) in the 2015/16 season.\nThey were re-founded in 1968 after going bankrupt (having no money) in 1962. They were first founded in 1921. They are thought of as hard working but having no chance of success. Their nickname is Stanley. They play at the Interlink Express Stadium in Accrington in Lancashire, in England."}
{"id": "3180", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3180", "title": "Telford United F.C.", "text": "A.F.C Telford United is a football club based in Telford, Shropshire, England. They are currently a member of the National League North, the sixth tier of English football.\nThey were founded in 2004. They are based off the original Telford United, which folded in 2004 after financial problems.\nThey play their home games in New Bucks Head in Wellington, which is a part of Telford."}
{"id": "3182", "revid": "238712", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3182", "title": "A.F.C. Wimbledon", "text": "AFC Wimbledon is an English football club from London. The club are currently in EFL League One.\nAFC Wimbledon were formed in 2002 by fans angry at Wimbledon F.C. moving to Milton Keynes, 70 miles away from South London. They play at Plough Lane in London."}
{"id": "3183", "revid": "1103963", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3183", "title": "Sheffield F.C.", "text": "Sheffield Football Club is a football club in England.\nSheffield F.C. is the oldest football club in the world. It was set up in 1857 in the city of Sheffield. Sheffield F.C. initially played games under the Sheffield rules and did not officially adopt the FA rules until 1878.\nUnlike Sheffield United F.C. and Sheffield Wednesday F.C., it does not play in a national league."}
{"id": "3189", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3189", "title": "Asteroid belt", "text": "The asteroid belt or main belt is a ring of small and large rocks and dust between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. The biggest object in the asteroid belt is Ceres, a dwarf planet. The Kirkwood gaps separate the asteroid belt into several groups.\nMost asteroids orbit at 2 to 3 times the distance between Earth and the Sun. Planets that are \"inside\" - or before - the asteroid belt (which means they are closer to the sun) are called \"inner planets.\" Planets that are \"outside\" - that is, after - the asteroid belt are called \"outer planets\": so Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars are \"inner planets,\" while Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are the \"outer planets.\"\nOrigin.\nIn 1802, shortly after discovering 2 Pallas, Heinrich Olbers suggested to William Herschel that Ceres and Pallas were fragments of a much larger planet that once occupied the Mars\u2013Jupiter region, this planet having suffered an internal explosion or a cometary impact many million years before. This hypothesis has fallen from favor. The large amount of energy needed to destroy a planet, and with the belt's low combined mass (only about 4% of the mass of the Moon) do not support the hypothesis. Also, the significant chemical differences between the asteroids are difficult to explain if they come from the same planet. Today, most scientists accept that the asteroids never formed a planet at all.\nIn general, the formation and evolution of the Solar System happened when a cloud of interstellar dust and gas collapsed under the influence of gravity to form the Sun and planetesimals, and eventually the planets. This gravitational accretion led to the formation of the rocky planets and the gas giants.\nPlanetesimals in the region which would become the asteroid belt were too strongly disturbed by Jupiter's gravity to form a planet. Instead they continued to orbit the Sun as before, while occasionally colliding. In regions where the velocity of the collisions was too high, the shattering of planetesimals was more common than accretion, preventing the formation of planet-sized bodies."}
{"id": "3190", "revid": "38483", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3190", "title": "Asteroid field", "text": ""}
{"id": "3193", "revid": "1068258", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3193", "title": "Essen", "text": "Essen (; Low Franconian and Ripuarian: \"Esse\", Latin: \"Assindia\") is a German city in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia. It is on the Ruhr River and it is near Cologne, Duisburg and Bochum. 585,000 people live in Essen. Together with Dortmund, Essen is the biggest city of the Ruhr area with its 5,000,000 inhabitants. Essen is often called the shopping city (\"Einkaufsstadt\") because there are so many malls and shops in it.\nLocation of Essen.\nEssen is in North Rhine-Westphalia and part of the Ruhr area, where eleven cities and four districts are. The rivers Ruhr and Emscher flow through the city. The lake \"Baldeney\" is part of the Ruhr. Essen's neighbour cities are Oberhausen, M\u00fclheim an der Ruhr, Ratingen, Heiligenhaus and Velbert in the Rhineland; and Hattingen, Bochum, Gelsenkirchen, Gladbeck and Bottrop in Westphalia. Other near cities are Duisburg, D\u00fcsseldorf, Cologne, Dortmund and M\u00fcnster.\nPolitics.\nBecause of the large number of coal mine workers in Essen, the SPD, the Social Democratic Party of Germany, always was very strong in Essen. During the time of National Socialism, the Nazi Party installed the mayors. But from 1999 to 2009, the Christian Democratic Party ruled the city with the mayor Dr.Wolfgang Reiniger. At the local elections of 2009, the SPD's candidate Reinhard Pa\u00df became the new mayor.\nHistory of Essen.\nAround 850, Saint Altfrid founded the \"Damenstift\", an abbey for women, ruled by a prince abbess. In this time the cathedral of Essen was built. In those days the name of the city was \"Assindia\" in Latin. Later it changed over \"Essendia\" and \"Essend\" to \"Essen\". 1377 Essen became a \"free imperial city\". At this time, Essen was just a small city in a region where few people lived. The city became more important when the Industrial Revolution began. In 1811, \"Friedrich Krupp\" founded a small steel factory in Essen which was fast growing. The city population also grew, and 80 years after the foundation of Krupp's steel work, Essen was a big city with 100,000 inhabitants. Because in the region of the Ruhr River much coal was found, many coal mines were founded in Essen and other near cities. Great industrial families like the \"Krupp\"s, the \"Haniel\"s and the \"Grillo\"s gave money for cultural buildings like the Grillo theatre and the Folkwang museum. Because of its big industry, Essen was destroyed with bombs in the Second World War. Many people gave their lives, and many buildings were destroyed. Not all were rebuilt after WW2. But because the coal mining industry ended mining in Essen in the 1970's (coal from abroad was getting cheaper), the city was getting poor. The \"Strukturwandel\" (structural change) saved Essen. Old collieries like \"Zeche Zollverein\" became museums or theatres. In 2003, the universities of Essen and Duisburg joined together as the university Duisburg-Essen.\nIn 2010 Essen was \"Kulturhauptstadt Europas\" (European Capital of Culture) together with Istanbul and P\u00e9cs in Hungary.\nMedia in Essen.\nThe \"WDR\" (\"Westdeutscher Rundfunk/Western German Broadcasting\") has a TV-station in Essen. The two biggest newspapers, the \"WAZ\" (\"Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung/Western German common newspaper\") and the \"NRZ\", the \"Neue Ruhr Zeitung/New Ruhr newspaper\" (at the lower Rhine region\"Neue Rhein Zeitung/New Rhein newspaper\") are in the city. Both newspapers belong to the WAZ-media group. Essen also has a radio station named \"Radio Essen\".\nBoroughs of Essen.\nEssen has nine districts (\"Bezirke\") and 50 boroughs (\"Stadtteile\"). The most famous and most known are \"Kettwig\", until 1975 a separate town and not part of Essen, with the \"Altstadt\" of Kettwig, where many timber framing houses are (\"Fachwerkh\u00e4user\"). Also well-known is \"Werden\". It lays like Kettwig in the south of the city and is the oldest borough of Essen. The \"Werden abbey\" stands here. In Essen-\"R\u00fcttenscheid\" there are many cultural buildings (like the \"Folkwang\" or the \"Ruhrland\" museum). The WDR-studio and Essen's trade fair, the \"Gruga\" are also in R\u00fcttenscheid. In the north of Essen is \"Katernberg\", where in the past the coal mine workers lived. Here is \"Zeche Zollverein\". In Katernberg, many houses were built by the Krupp family for their workers. Another big coal mine worker's borough, perhaps the biggest, is \"Margarethenh\u00f6he\" near R\u00fcttenscheid. It is named after Margarethe Krupp, wife of Friedrich Alfred Krupp. The Krupps wanted their workers to be absolutely dependent on them. So they built houses and malls for them, where they should spend their money, what they got from Krupp, again to the industrials. Today Margarethenh\u00f6he is one of the most beautiful boroughs of Essen. Another big borough of Essen is \"Steele\" in the east of the city, that was in the 19th and early 20th century a city as big as Essen. In the west of Essen is \"Borbeck\", which was long separate from Essen. In Borbeck is the great Borbeck Castle (\"Schloss Borbeck\"). The people of Borbeck speak their own regional dialect, the \"Borbecker Platt\".\nThe nine districts of Essen are:\nFamous people in Essen.\nThe most known people from Essen are the actor Heinz R\u00fchmann, whose parents were the owner of Essen's famous hotel \"Handelshof\" near the Central Station (\"Hauptbahnhof)\", Carl Humann, explorer of the Great Altar of Pergamon, Karl Baedeker, a publisher whose company made many books for tourists (\"Baedeker\"), Alfred Krupp and Franz Dinndendahl, who made the first steam machine in the Ruhr area. These people were born in the city. Other people who were not born in Essen but lived and worked there a long time are Berthold Beitz, who saved the Krupp company from the ruin, Wilhelm Busch, a famous poet and painter or Gustav Heinemann, a German politician who was mayor of Essen and federal president of Germany. Other people like Otto von Bismarck and Paul von Hindenburg were honorary people in Essen.\nSport.\nThe most popular sport in Germany is \"Association football\" or \"soccer\". The most important soccer clubs of Essen are \"Rot-Wei\u00df Essen (RWE)\" and \"Schwarz-Wei\u00df Essen\". They play in the 4th and the 5th league. More successfully is the women's association football club \"SG Essen-Sch\u00f6nebeck\" that plays in the first \"Bundesliga\". \nThe second big sport is team handball. \"TUSEM Essen\" is the most important club in Essen. \nThe most popular ice hockey club is named \"ESC Moskitos Essen\" and the biggest basketball club \"ETB Wohnbau Baskets Essen\". \nEssen also has many table tennis and swimming clubs.\nTwin towns.\nEssen's twin towns are:"}
{"id": "3194", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3194", "title": "Gardening", "text": "Gardening is the growing of plants such as flowers, shrubs and trees as a hobby or recreation. Some people also grow vegetables or fruit in their gardens. People do gardening outdoors in the soil in their backyard, or in pots or containers on their balcony or on their patio. Some people do gardening on a roof.\nPeople do indoor gardening inside their house or inside a building. Sometimes indoor gardening is done in greenhouses, which are special buildings where plants are grown. A greenhouse has a transparent glass or plastic roof and walls that let sunlight in. Grow tent is also used for indoor plants. Grow tent helps plant to grow in a more spectacular and develop a friendly environment. Water gardening is growing plants in ornamental pools and ponds. People doing water gardening plant water lilies and other aquatic plants. \nGardening can be done outside of the home, in city parks, botanical gardens, zoos, amusement parks, theme parks, and around tourist attractions. These types of gardens are cared for by people called gardeners or groundskeepers.\nGardening compared with farming.\nGardening is related to farming. But farming is done on a much larger scale. A farm may have hundreds of square kilometres of plants and crops. A garden in a person's backyard usually only measures a few square meters. As well, farming is done as a business, to sell the crops, fruit, and vegetables that are produced. Gardening is done just to produce fruit or vegetables for the gardener's own family. Gardening is done as a hobby or as a recreation, not as a business.\nGardening tools.\nGardeners use tools to dig in the soil and water the crops. These tools include a spade, a fork, a hoe, a basket, a watering can, a hose, a Sprinkler, a bucket, a trowel and a wheelbarrow. With growing, technology gardeners now have tech like Self-watering containers, Garden sensors, Hydroponic systems and Indoor lighting systems.\nGardens as art.\nIn many countries and cultures, designing beautiful gardens is treated as a fine art. In Japan, for instance, Zen monks created Japanese gardens. In Europe in the 1700s, kings and queens had formal gardens built. One example is the gardens at the Versailles palace in Paris, France. Landscaping, the making of an artificial landscape, may include gardening and the designer may be a professional landscape architect."}
{"id": "3195", "revid": "618550", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3195", "title": "Democracy", "text": "democracy means \"rule by the people\". The name is used for different forms of government, where the people can take part in the decisions that affect the way their community is run. In modern times, there are different ways this can be done:\nTo become a stable democracy, a state usually undergoes a process of democratic consolidation.\nDemocracy is the opposite of a dictatorship, a type of government in which the power is centralized on the hands of a single person who rules the nation, lacks political pluralism, the people have no participation in the local politics and little to no freedom of expression.\nTypes of government.\nAfter people hold an election, the candidates that won are determined. The way this is done can be simple: The candidate with the most votes gets elected. Very often, the politicians being elected belong to a political party. Instead of choosing a person, people vote for a party. The party with the most votes then picks the candidates. \nUsually, the people being elected need to meet certain conditions: They need to have a certain age or a government body needs to determine that they are suitably qualified to perform the job. \nNot everyone can vote in an election. Suffrage is only given to people who are citizens. Some groups may be excluded, for example prisoners. \nFor some elections, a country may make voting compulsory. Someone who does not vote, and who does not give a good reason usually has to pay a fine\nKinds of democracy.\nDemocracy may be direct or indirect.\nIn a direct democracy, everyone has the right to make laws together. One modern example of direct democracy is a referendum, which is the name for the kind of way to pass a law where everyone in the community votes on it. Direct democracies are not usually used to run countries, because it is hard to get millions of people to get together all the time to make laws and other decisions. There is not enough time.\nIn an indirect, or representative democracy, people choose representatives to make laws for them. These people can be mayors, councilmen, members of Parliament, or other government officials. This is a much more common kind of democracy. Large communities like cities and countries use this method, but it may not be needed for a small group.\nHistory.\nAncient origins.\nThis kind of government was developed long ago by the ancient Greeks in classical Athens. They had everyone who was a citizen (not slaves, women, foreigners, and children) get together in one area. The assembly would talk about what kinds of laws they wanted and voted on them. The Council would suggest the laws. All citizens were allowed in the assembly. \nThe Council were picked by draws (lottery). The participants in the Council would change every year and the number of people in the Council was at the most 500. For some offices the Athenian citizens would pick a leader by writing the name of their favorite candidate on a piece of stone or wood. The person with the most votes became the leader.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Middle Ages, there were many systems, although only a few people could join in at this time. The Parliament of England began from the Magna Carta, a document which said that the King's power was limited, and protected certain rights of the people. The first elected parliament was De Montfort's Parliament in England in 1265.\nHowever, only a few people could actually join in. Parliament was chosen by only a few percent of the people (in 1780, fewer than 3% of people joined in). The ruler also had the power to call parliaments. After a long time, the power of Parliament began to grow. After the Glorious Revolution in 1688, the English Bill of Rights 1689 made Parliament more powerful. Later, the ruler became a symbol instead of having real power.\nDemocratic consolidation.\nDemocratic consolidation is the process by which a new democracy matures. Once mature, it is unlikely to revert to dictatorship rule without an external shock. \nThe idea is that unconsolidated democracies suffer from intermittent elections which are not free and fair. In other words, powerful groups are able to prevent the system working fairly."}
{"id": "3196", "revid": "1141674", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3196", "title": "Game", "text": "A game is something that people often do for fun. If so, it is different from work. Many sports are games, and there are many professional sports. In those cases, there is money to be made, because it is a type of entertainment.\nThere are different kinds of games using many kinds of equipment. For example, in video games, people often use controllers or their keyboard to control what happens on a screen, such as a television screens and computers ones too. In card games, players use playing cards. There are also games that use your body, such as the Kinect. Most games need equipment, but not always. Children's street games often need no equipment.\nIn board games, players may move pieces on a flat surface called a \"board\". The object of the game varies. In race-type games like ludo, the object is to reach the end first. In go the object is to surround more space. In soccer it is to score more goals. Some games have complicated rules, some have simple rules.\nDefinitions.\nLudwig Wittgenstein.\nLudwig Wittgenstein was probably the first academic philosopher to address the definition of the word \"game\". In his \"Philosophical Investigations\", Wittgenstein demonstrated that the elements (parts) of games, such as play, rules, and competition, all fail to correctly define what games are. He concluded that people apply the term \"game\" to a range of different human activities that are related, but not closely related.\n\"Homo Ludens\".\n\"Homo Ludens\" (Playing Man) is a book written in 1938 by Dutch historian Johan Huizinga. It discusses the importance of the play element in culture and society. Huizinga suggests that play is a condition for the generation of culture.\nRoger Caillois.\nFrench sociologist Roger Caillois, in his book \"Les jeux et les hommes (Games and Men)\", said that a game is an activity which is these things:\nChris Crawford.\nComputer game designer Chris Crawford tried to define the word \"game\" using a series of comparisons:\nCrawford's definition of a game is: an interactive, goal-oriented activity, with opponents to play against, and where players and opponents can interfere with each other.\nHistory of Games.\nThe first writer of history was Herodotus, an ancient Greek. He wrote a book called \u201cThe Histories\u201d around 440 BC, which is nearly 2500 years ago. Some of the stories he wrote were not true, and we don't know if this is one of those.\nHerodotus tells us about king Atys; he ruled about 5,500 [five thousand five hundred] years ago in a country called Lydia. His country was in western Asia Minor, near modern Greece. Atys had a serious problem; his lands had very little food because the climate was not good for agriculture. The people of Lydia demonstrated patience and hoped that the good times of plenty would return.\nBut when things failed to get better, the people of Lydia thought up a strange solution for their problem. The path they took to fight their natural need to eat \u2013 the hungry times caused by the unusually hard climate - was to play games for one entire day so that they would not think about food. On the next day they would eat, so eating occurred every second day. In this way they passed 18 years, and in that time they invented dice, balls, and all the games commonly played today.\nGames appear in all cultures all over the world, an ancient custom that brings people together for social opportunities. Games allow people to go beyond the limit of the immediate physical experience, to use their imagination. Common features of games include a finish that you cannot forecast, agreed upon rules, competition, separate place and time, imaginary elements, elements of chance, established goals and personal enjoyment. Games are used to teach, to build friendships, and to indicate status.\nIn his 1938 history book the Dutch writer Johan Huizinga says that games are older than human culture. He sees games as the beginning of complex human activities such as language, law, war, philosophy and art. Ancient people used bones to make the first games. Dice are very early game pieces. Games began as part of ancient religions. The oldest gaming pieces ever found \u2013 49 [forty nine] small painted stones with pictures cut into them from 5,000 [five thousand] years ago \u2013 come from Turkey, so perhaps the history of Herodotus is true. One of the first board games, Senet, appears in ancient Egypt around 3,500 [three thousand five hundred] years ago. The ancient Greeks had a board game similar to checkers, and also many ball games.\nThe first reference to the game of Go occurs in Chinese records from around 2,400 [two thousand four hundred] years ago. Originally the game Go was used by political leaders to develop skill in strategy and mental skill. Knowing how to play Go was required by a Chinese gentleman, along with the skills of artistic writing or calligraphy, painting and the ability to play a musical instrument. These were regarded as the four most important skills. In ancient China, a gentleman had to pass a test in these four key skills in order to get a good paying job in the government. The Chinese brought Go to Korea, and it entered Japan around 1,500 [one thousand five hundred] years ago, and it has been popular ever since.\nIn March 2016 a Google computer program beat the best Go players in the world. Go is believed to be the most complex board game ever created. Is this computer program smarter than a person? Well, it did beat the South Korean Go master Lee Se-dol, and Lee was surprised by the result. He acknowledged defeat after three and a half hours of play. Demis Hassabis, who made the Google program, called it an important moment in history, because a machine beat the best person in the world in an intelligent game. Such computer programs rely on what is called artificial intelligence. Go is a two-player game of strategy said to have had an origin in China perhaps around 3,000 [three thousand] years ago. Players compete to win more territory by placing black and white \u201cstones\u201d on a board made up of 19 [nineteen] lines by 19 [nineteen] lines.\nThe first computer game that was ever created was probably the game OXO by Alexander Douglas in 1952. It was a version of tic-tac-toe. But most people consider the first true computer game where players actually participate to be Tennis for Two developed in 1958 by the physics scientist William Higginbotham. He wanted to teach about gravity, the force of attraction between masses. These men who created the early computer games did not forecast the potential for the popular use of games, because at that period in modern history it took a small room full of computers to make these games work! Another early game was Spacewar! developed in 1961 by MIT university student Steve Russell. In 1972 the company Atari produced the Pong game which was a huge commercial success; being a commercial success means that it made a lot of money. This was the true beginning of computer games that could be played at home.\nToday, all around the world people spend more the 3,000,000,000 [three billion] hours a week playing computer games. This is equivalent to more than 342,000 [three hundred and forty two hundred thousand] years!"}
{"id": "3197", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3197", "title": "Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "3199", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3199", "title": "Nebraska", "text": "Nebraska is a state near to the center of the United States. Its capital is Lincoln and the largest city is Omaha. It touches the states of Wyoming, South Dakota, Iowa, Missouri, Colorado and Kansas.\nNebraska is known for its agriculture, especially beef and corn.\nNebraska has hot summers and cold winters. A temperature of 30\u00a0\u00b0C (which is about 86\u00a0\u00b0F) is common in the summer, and in the winter it can be -20\u00a0\u00b0C (which is about -4\u00a0\u00b0F) or colder at night.\nHistory.\nNative American tribes, including the Omaha, Oto, Missouri, Pawnee, Arapaho and Cheyenne, all ceded land in Nebraska to the U.S. government.\nOn May 30, 1854, the United States government made a law called the Kansas-Nebraska Act. It made two territories called Kansas Territory and Nebraska Territory. In the 1860s, many people moved there to take free land from the government. Nebraska became a state on March 1, 1867."}
{"id": "3219", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3219", "title": "Time", "text": "Time is the never-ending continued progress of existence and events. It happens in an apparently irreversible way from the past, through the present and to the future.\nTo measure time, we can use anything that repeats itself regularly. One example is the start of a new day (as Earth rotates on its axis). Two more are the phases of the moon (as it orbits the Earth), and the seasons of the year (as the Earth orbits the Sun). \nEven in ancient times, people developed calendars to keep track of the number of days in a year. They also developed sundials that used the moving shadows cast by the sun through the day to measure times smaller than a day. Today, highly accurate clocks can measure time in less than a billionth of a second. The study of time measurement is known as horology.\nThe SI (International Systems of Units) unit of time is one second, written as s. When used as a variable in mathematics, time is often represented by the symbol formula_1.\nIn Einsteinian physics, time and space can be combined into a single concept. For more on the topic, see space-time continuum."}
{"id": "3220", "revid": "1143779", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3220", "title": "Force", "text": " \nIn physics, a force is an interaction between \"objects\". It is called an interaction because if one object acts on another, its action is \"matched\" by a reaction from the other object. This idea is known as Newton's third law, where \"action\" and \"reaction\" are \"equal and opposite\" (\"matched\").\nThe \"objects\" are just the things the force acts between. Different forces act between different sorts of object. For example, gravity acts between objects with mass, like the sun and the earth. Another example is electromagnetic force, which acts between objects with charge, like an electron and the nucleus of an atom. \"Gravity\" and \"electromagnetic force\" are two examples of forces. \nA force changes the state of an object (some physical quantity changes) or, strictly, the states of two objects, since the force is an interaction. For example, a force causes an affected object to be pushed or pulled in a certain direction. This changes the object's momentum. Forces cause objects to accelerate, add to the object's overall pressure, change direction, or change shape. The strength of a force is measured in Newtons (N). There are four fundamental forces in physics.\nA force is always a push, pull, or a twist, and it affects objects by pushing them up, pulling them down, pushing them to a side, or by changing their motion or shape in some other way.\nNewton's Second Law.\nAccording to Newton's Second Law of Motion, the formula for finding force is:\nwhere formula_2 is the force, \nformula_3 is the mass of an object, \nand formula_4 is the acceleration of the object.\nThis formula says that when there is a force on an object then it will move faster and faster.\nIf the force is weak and the object is heavy, then it will take a long time to increase the speed very much, \nbut if the force is strong and the object is light, then it will move a lot faster very quickly.\nWeight.\nGravity is an acceleration. Everything that has a mass is being pulled toward the Earth because of that acceleration. This pull is a force called weight. \nOne can take the equation above and change formula_4 to the standard gravity \"g\", then a formula about the gravity on earth can be found:\nwhere formula_7 is the weight of an object, \nformula_3 is the mass of an object, \nand formula_9 is the acceleration due to gravity at sea level. It is about formula_10.\nThis formula says that when you know the mass of an object, then you can calculate how much force there is on the object because of gravity.\nYou must be on earth to use this formula. If you are on the moon or another planet, then you can use the formula but \"g\" will be different.\nForce is a vector, so it can be stronger or weaker and it can also point in different directions. \nGravity always points down into the ground (if you are not in space).\nGravitational force.\nAnother equation that says something about gravity is:\nformula_2 is force; formula_13 is the gravitational constant, which is used to show how gravity accelerates an object; formula_14 is the mass of one object; formula_15 is the mass of the second object; and formula_16 is the distance between the objects.\nThis equation is used to calculate how the earth moves around the sun and how the moon moves around the earth. It is also used to calculate how other planets, stars and objects in space move around.\nThe equation says that if two objects are very heavy then there is a strong force between them because of gravity.\nIf they are very far apart then the force is weaker."}
{"id": "3221", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3221", "title": "Laboratory techniques", "text": "Laboratory techniques are the techniques of handling the various pieces of apparatus.\nBasic techniques.\nHandling of chemicals.\nWays to dissolve a solid in a liquid or to mix two liquids in a test tube:"}
{"id": "3222", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3222", "title": "International System of Units", "text": "The International System of Units is the standard modern form of the metric system. The name of this system can be shortened or abbreviated to SI, from the French name \"Syst\u00e8me International d'unit\u00e9s\".\nThe International System of Units is a system of measurement based on 7 base units: the metre (length), kilogram (mass), second (time), ampere (electric current), Kelvin (temperature), mole (quantity), and candela (brightness). These base units can be used in combination with each other. This creates \"SI derived units\", which can be used to describe other quantities, such as volume, energy, pressure, and velocity.\nThe system is used almost globally. Only Myanmar, Liberia, and the United States do not use SI as their official system of measurement. In these countries, though, SI is commonly used in science and medicine.\nHistory and use.\nThe metric system was created in France after the French Revolution in 1789. The original system only had two standard units, the kilogram and the metre. The metric system became popular amongst scientists.\nIn the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell and William Thomson (later known as Lord Kelvin) suggested a system with three base units - length, mass, and time. Other units would be derived from those three base units. Later, this suggestion would be used to create the centimetre-gram-second system of units (CGS), which used the centimetre as the base unit for length, the gram as the base unit for mass, and the second as the base unit for time. It also added the dyne as the base unit for force and the erg as the base unit for energy.\nAs scientists studied electricity and magnetism, they realized other base units were needed to describe these subjects. By the middle of the 20th century, many different versions of the metric system were being used. This was very confusing.\nIn 1954, the 9th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) created the first version of the International System of Units. The six base units that they used were the metre, kilogram, second, ampere, Kelvin, and candela. The seventh base unit, the mole, was added in 1971.\nSI is now used almost everywhere in the world, except in the United States, Liberia and Myanmar, where the older imperial units are still widely used. Other countries, most of them historically related to the British Empire, are slowly replacing the old imperial system with the metric system or using both systems at the same time.\nUnits of measurement.\nBase units.\nThe SI base units are measurements used by scientists and other people around the world. All the other units can be written by combining these seven base units in different ways. These other units are called \"derived units\".\nDerived units.\nDerived units are created by combining the base units. The base units can be divided, multiplied, or raised to powers. Some derived units have special names. Usually these were created to make calculations simpler.\nPrefixes.\nVery large or very small measurements can be written using prefixes. Prefixes are added to the beginning of the unit to make a new unit. For example, the prefix \"kilo-\" means \"1000\" times the original unit and the prefix \"milli-\" means \"0.001\" times the original unit. So one \"kilometre\" is 1000\u00a0metres and one \"milligram\" is a 1000th of a gram."}
{"id": "3223", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3223", "title": "Systeme Internationale", "text": ""}
{"id": "3224", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3224", "title": "System international", "text": ""}
{"id": "3225", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3225", "title": "System International", "text": ""}
{"id": "3226", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3226", "title": "Lake Michigan", "text": "Lake Michigan is one of the five Great Lakes in North America. It has a surface area of . It is wide. Lake Michigan is the 5th largest lake in the world.\nLake Michigan is surrounded by the U.S. states of Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, and Michigan. It is the only Great Lake that is not partly in Canada. The largest city on the shore of Lake Michigan is Chicago.\nThe earliest time that people lived near the lake was 800 CE. The word \"Michigan\" originally meant the lake itself. It is believed to come from the Ojibwa word \"mishigami\" meaning \"great water\".\nThe first person to reach the deepest part of Lake Michigan was J. Val Klump. Klump reached the bottom with a submarine as part of a 1985 research expedition.\nTwelve million people live along Lake Michigan's shores. They are mainly in the Chicago and Milwaukee areas."}
{"id": "3237", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3237", "title": "Gas syringe", "text": "A gas syringe is a tool used in a laboratory. It is used to collect a gas or to measure the volume of a gas.\nSimple systems can be settled in the laboratory to collect gas or to compress it. It is usually used to explain Gas Law."}
{"id": "3241", "revid": "16", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3241", "title": "Sports utility vehicle", "text": ""}
{"id": "3255", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3255", "title": "Apiculture", "text": ""}
{"id": "3257", "revid": "1020280", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3257", "title": "Mixture", "text": "In chemistry, a mixture is a substance that is made up of two or more simpler substances. These substances can be chemical elements or compounds. A mixture can be made of liquids, solids, or gases.\nCharacteristics.\nA mixture is not the same as a compound which is made of two or more atoms connected together. For instance, a mixture of the gases hydrogen and nitrogen contains hydrogen and nitrogen, not the compound ammonia which is made of hydrogen and nitrogen atoms.\nA mixture where the different parts can be distinguished easily is called \"heterogenous\", one where this is not the case is called \"homogeneous\". A third form is called colloid.\nIf one substance in a mixture dissolves in the other, it is called a solution. For example, if sugar is put in water it forms a mixture, then dissolves to make a solution. If it does not dissolve, it would be called a suspension.\nSolids can be mixtures also. Alloys are mixtures. Many kinds of soil and rock are mixtures of different minerals. Thus, a mixture is made of two or more elements and/or compounds which are not chemically combined."}
{"id": "3258", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3258", "title": "Language family", "text": "Language families are groups of languages that are related to each other because they come from a common older language. The languages in such a family are similar in their vocabulary or structure.\nFor example, French and Spanish both come from Latin. Latin was spoken a long time ago, and some of the people who spoke it started to speak one way, saying, for example, for good: \"bueno\" while another group started saying \"bon.\" Most words are said a little differently in Spanish and French, so the two are called different languages.\nMost languages belong to a language family, but some languages do not. These languages are called Language isolates.\nThere also are constructed languages, like for example Esperanto. Constructed languages are made for different reasons: making a 'world language', for fun, for use in fiction, etc.\nMajor language families.\nBy number of languages.\n\"Ethnologue\" 22 (2019) lists these language families as \"major\". Each has at least 1% of all languages on Earth:\n\"Glottolog\" 4.0 (2019) lists the following as the largest families, of 8494 languages:"}
{"id": "3259", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3259", "title": "Chess", "text": "Chess is a board game for two players. It is played in a square board, made of 64 smaller squares, with eight squares on each side. Each player starts with sixteen pieces: eight pawns, two knights, two bishops, two rooks, one queen and one king. The goal of the game is for each player to try and checkmate the king of the opponent. Checkmate is a threat ('check') to the opposing king which no move can stop. It ends the game.\nDuring the game the two opponents take turns to move one of their pieces to a different square of the board. One player ('White') has pieces of a light color; the other player ('Black') has pieces of a dark color. There are rules about how pieces move, and about taking the opponent's pieces off the board. The player with white pieces always makes the first move. Because of this, White has a small advantage, and wins more often than Black in tournament games.\nChess is popular and is often played in competitions called chess tournaments. It is enjoyed in many countries, and is a national hobby in Russia.\nHistory.\nMost historians agree that the game of chess was first played in northern India during the Gupta Empire in the 6th century . This early type of chess was known as \"Chaturanga\", a Sanskrit word for the military. The Gupta chess pieces were divided like their military into the infantry, cavalry, elephants, and chariots. In time, these pieces became the pawn, knight, bishop, and rook. The English words \"chess\" and \"check\" both come from the Persian word \"sh\u0101h\" meaning king.\nThe earliest written evidence of chess is found in three romances (epic stories) written in Sassanid Persia around 600. The game was known as \"chatrang\" or \"shatranj\". When Persia was taken over by Muslims (633\u2013644) the game was spread to all parts of the Muslim world. Muslim traders carried the game to Russia and to Western Europe. By the year 1000 it had spread all over Europe. In the 13th century a Spanish manuscript called \"Libro de los Juegos\" describes the games of \"shatranj\" (chess), backgammon, and dice.\nThe game changed greatly between about 1470 to 1495. The rules of the older game were changed in the West so that some of the pieces (queen, bishop) had more scope, development of the pieces was faster, and the game more exciting. The new game formed the basis of modern international chess. Historians of chess consider this as the most important change since the game was invented.\nRules.\nThe rules of chess are governed by the World Chess Federation, which is known by the initials FIDE, meaning \"F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale des \u00c9checs\". The rules are in the section \"Laws of Chess\" of the \"FIDE Handbook\". FIDE also give rules and guidelines for chess tournaments.\nSetup.\nChess is played on a square board divided into eight rows of squares called ranks and eight columns called files, with a dark square in each player's lower left corner. This is altogether 64 squares. The colors of the squares are laid out in a checker (chequer) pattern in light and dark squares. To make speaking and writing about chess easy, each square has a name. Each rank has a number from 1 to 8, and each file a letter from \"a\" to \"h\". This means that every square on the board has its own label, such as g1 or f5. The pieces are in white and black sets. The players are called White and Black, and at the start of a game each player has 16 pieces. The 16 pieces are one king, one queen, two rooks, two bishops, two knights and eight pawns.\nMovement.\nDefinitions: vertical lines are \"files\"; horizontal lines are \"ranks\"; lines at 45\u00b0 are \"diagonals\".\nEach piece has its own way of moving around the board. The \"X\" marks the squares where the piece can move.\nCapturing.\nMost pieces capture as they move. If a piece lands on an opponent's piece, the opposing piece is taken off the board. There are three special cases:\nCheck and checkmate.\nIf a move is made which attacks the opposing king, that king is said to be 'in check'. The player whose king is checked must make a move to remove the check. The options are: moving the king, capturing the threatening piece, or moving another piece between the threatening piece and the king. If the player whose king is in danger cannot do any of these things, it is checkmate, and the player loses the game.\nSpecial moves.\nCastling.\nOnce in every game, each king can make a special move, known as \"castling\". When the king castles, it moves two squares to the left or right. When this happens, the rook is moved to stand on the opposite side of the King. Castling is only allowed if all of these rules are kept:p120\nEn passant.\n\"En passant\" ('in passing' in French) is a special capture. It is only available when a pawn moves forward two squares past an opposing pawn on an adjacent file. The opposing pawn must be on the 5th rank from its own side. Then the opponent's pawn can capture the double-mover \"as if it had only moved one square forward\". This option is open on the next move only.\nFor example, if the black pawn has just moved up two squares from g7 to g5, then the white pawn on f5 can take it by \"en passant\" on g6. The \"en passant\" rule was developed when pawns were allowed to make their double move. The rule made it more difficult for players to avoid pawn exchanges and blockade the position. It kept the game more open.\nPromotion.\nWhen a pawn moves to its eighth rank, it must be changed for a piece: a queen, rook, bishop, or knight of the same color (player's choice). Normally, the pawn is \"queened\", but in some advantageous cases another piece is chosen, called 'under-promotion'.\nWays a game may end.\nCheckmates are rare in competitive chess. The most common ends are decisions made by one or both players.\nCompetition rules.\nThe FIDE rules for competitive chess include all the above rules, plus several others.p92 et seq\nTouch and move law.\nIf players wish to adjust a piece on the board, they must first say \"J'adoube\" (I adjust) or the equivalent. Apart from that, if a piece is touched it must be moved if possible. This is the 'touch and move' law.p425 If no legal move is possible with the touched piece, the player must make a legal move with another piece.Section 4p90 et seq When a player's hand leaves a piece after moving it then the move is over and may not be changed (if the move was legal).\nThere are a few famous cases where players appeared to break this rule without being punished. The most famous example was by the then World Champion Garry Kasparov against Judit Polgar in a top-class tournament.\nChess clocks.\nCompetitive games of chess must be played with special chess clocks which time a player only when it is his/her turn to move. The essence is that a player has to make a certain number of moves in a certain total time. After moving, the player presses a button on the clock. This stops the player's clock, and start's the opponent's clock. Usually the clocks are mechanical, but some are electronic.Article 6p92 et seq Electronic clocks can be set to various programs, and they can count moves made.chapter 8\nNotation for recording moves.\nThe moves of a chess game are written down by using a special chess notation. This is compulsory for any competitive game.Article 8 &amp; Appendix E Usually algebraic chess notation is used. In algebraic notation, each square has one and only one name (whether you are looking from White's side of the board or Black's). Here, moves are written in the format of: initial of piece moved \u2013 file where it moved \u2013 rank where it moved. For example, Qg5 means \"queen moves to the g-file and 5th rank\" (that is, to the square g5). If there are two pieces of the same type that can move to the same square, one more letter or number is added to show the file or rank from which the piece moved, e.g. Ngf3 means \"knight from the g-file moves to the square f3\". The letter P showing a pawn is not used, so that e4 means \"pawn moves to the square e4\".\nIf the piece makes a capture, \"x\" is written before the square in which the capturing piece lands on. Example: \"Bxf3\" means \"bishop captures on f3\". When a pawn makes a capture, the file from which the pawn left is used in place of a piece initial. For example: exd5 means \"pawn captures on d5.\"\nIf a pawn moves to its eighth rank, getting a promotion, the piece chosen is written after the move, for example e1Q or e1=Q. Castling is written by the special notations 0-0 for kingside castling and 0-0-0 for queenside. A move which places the opponent's king in check normally has the notation \"+\" added. Checkmate can be written as # or ++. At the end of the game, 1-0 means \"White won\", 0-1 means \"Black won\" and \u00bd-\u00bd is a draw.\nIn print, \"figurines\" (like those in diagrams, but smaller) are used for the pieces rather than initials. This has the advantage of being language-free, whereas the initials of pieces are different in every language. Typefaces which include figurines can be purchased by chess authors. Also, basic notes can be added by using a system of well-known punctuation marks and other symbols. For example: ! means a good move, !! means a very good move, ? means a bad move, ?? a very bad move (sometimes called a \"blunder\"), !? a creative move that may be good, and ?! a doubtful move. The purpose of these methods is to make publications readable in a wider range of countries. For example, one kind of a simple \"trap\" known as the Scholar's mate, as in the diagram to the right, may be recorded:\n1. e4 e5\n2. Qh5?! Nc6\n3. Bc4 Nf6?? (3...Qe7 would prevent the mate, with 4...Nf6 next move)\n4. Qxf7# 1-0\nWith figurines in place of the initials, this would be understood by players everywhere.\nPlaying arena.\nPlayers may not smoke in the playing area, but only in areas designated by the organiser. Mobile phones may not be used or even switched on. Players may not use any sources of advice, and may not analyse on any device. These and other matters are covered by the FIDE Laws on the conduct of the players.Article 12\nStages of a game.\nChess is an easy game to learn the moves, but a difficult game to master. Strategy is an important part of the game. First of all comes the \"openings\", about which a great deal is now known. The best-known move, the King's Pawn opening, is the white player moving his king's pawn on e2 forward two spaces to e4. Black can reply to that move in various ways.\nOpening.\nThe first moves of a chess game are called the \"opening\". A chess opening is a name given to a series of opening moves. Recognized patterns of opening moves are \"openings\" and have been given names such as the Ruy Lopez or Sicilian defence. They are listed in reference works such as the \"Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings\". There are dozens of different openings. They range from gambits, where a pawn, say, is offered for fast development (e.g. the King's Gambit), to slower openings which lead to a maneuvering type of game (e.g. the R\u00e9ti opening). In some opening lines, the sequence thought best for both sides has been worked out to 20\u201330 moves, but most players avoid such lines. Expert players study openings throughout their chess career, as opening theory keeps on developing.\nThe basic aims of the opening phase are:\nPlayers think, and chess databases prove, that White, by virtue of the first move, begins the game with a better chance. Black normally tries to equalise, or to get some counterplay.\nMiddlegame.\nThe middlegame is the part of the game after most pieces have been developed. It is where most games are won and lost. Many games will end in resignation even before an endgame takes place.&lt;ref name=\"H/W\"&gt;Hooper D. and Whyld K. 1992. \"The Oxford companion to chess\". 2nd ed, Oxford University Press.&lt;/ref&gt;\nA middlegame position has a structure. That structure is determined by the opening. The simplest way to learn the middlegame is to select an opening and learn it well (see examples in English opening and French defence).\nThese are some things to look for when looking at a middlegame position:\nHere is an example from the borderline between opening and middlegame. In the diagram to the left, White will operate mainly on the Q-side, and Black on the K-side.\nWhite, to play, may wish to cope with Black playing 10...Nf4. He can do this by playing 10.g3, or by playing 10.Re1 so that if 10...Nf4 11.Bf1 will preserve the bishop (in this position an important defensive piece). Or maybe White will plough ahead with 10.c5, the key move on the Q-side.\nChessBase shows that the number of tournament games with these choices were:\nThe data base also shows that the overall results were significantly better for 10.Re1. What the player does is note the features on the board, and formulate a plan which takes the features into account. Then the player works out a sequence of moves. Of course, in practice, the opponent is interfering with the plan at every step!\nEndgame.\nThe endgame (or \"end game\" or \"ending\") is the part of the game when there are few pieces left on the board. There are three main strategic differences between earlier parts of the game and endgame:\nAll endgame positions can be put into two camps. On the one hand are positions which may be won by force. On the other hand, are positions which are drawn, or which should be drawn. The ones that are drawn for certain may be legally drawn (mate could not happen) or drawn by chess experience (no sane defence could lose). All endgames in master chess revolve around the borderline between winning and drawing. Generally, once a 'textbook' drawn position is reached the players will agree a draw; otherwise they play on.\nEndgames can be studied according to the types of pieces that remain on board. For example, king and pawn endgames have only kings and pawns on one or both sides and the task of the stronger side is to promote one of the pawns. Other endings are studied according to the pieces on board other than kings, e.g. rook and pawn versus rook endgame.\nBasic checkmates.\nBasic checkmates are positions in which one side has only a king and the other side has one or two pieces, enough to checkmate the opponent's king. They are usually learned at the beginner stage. Examples are mate with K+Q v K; K+R v K; K+2B v K; K+B&amp;N v K (this one is quite difficult).\nChess and computers.\nThere are two types of chess programs. One is to play against you; the other is to help you become a better player by learning more. The two types can be made to work together, though they have different functions.\nChess engines.\nChess engines are computer systems that can play chess games against human opponents. Quite a number have been devised; they can play at master level, though their processes are quite different from a human being.p87\nEvery year brings new advances, which if listed here would soon be out of date. Best advice is to go to English Wikipedia, who keep an up-to-date chart of the leading software: .\nChess databases.\nChess databases do not actually play. They give access to the recorded history of master chess. There are two components. First, there is the software, which lets one search and organise the database material. Then there is the actual database, typically one to four million games.\nIn practice, databases are used for two purposes. First, for a player to train his/her ability at specific openings. Second, to look up specific opponents to see what they play, and prepare against them beforehand.\nThe existence of chess databases is one of the reasons young players can achieve mastery at an early age.\nChessBase.\nChessBase is the biggest database, and widely used by masters. Although it can be used online, most users download the software and data onto their computer. If that computer happens to be a laptop, then they might take the laptop to tournaments, to help prepare for games. Players may not use computers or any other aid during games, but much preparation goes on behind the scenes. ChessBase has to be purchased, and it is not cheap.\nNew in Chess.\nThis is a Dutch magazine for advanced players, which runs an on-line database called NicBase as part of its services. NicBase is free, and has over a million games.\nChessgames.\nChessgames.com runs an on-line database of games. It is partly free, but requires registration. Full access to all its facilities is by a fairly modest subscription. It has over half a million games on its database.\nOn-line playing sites.\nThere are websites which a player can join (for a fee) and play on line. In this case, the subscriber will play against other subscribers, not a computer. All standards of players are amongst the members, and various events are on offer at different rates of play. The two leaders in this market are:\nFurther reading.\nEndgames.\nThese are endgames for improvers, based on reviews by John Watson."}
{"id": "3260", "revid": "1149666", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3260", "title": "Gold", "text": "Gold is a soft, dense, yellow metal. It is a chemical element. Its chemical symbol is Au. Its atomic number is 79. As a precious metal, it has been used for many thousands of years by people all over the world, for jewelry, and as money. Gold is important because it is rare, but also easier to use than other rare metals. It is also used to repair and replace teeth and in electronic equipment such as computers. The color of this metal is also called \"gold\".\nMining methods for gold are similar to other metals. Gold is so valued that the discovery of a new place to mine has sometimes caused a gold rush. The deepest workplaces for miners in the world are in South African gold mines.\nOften, gold is found as a native metal. This means it is not part of an ore, and does not need smelting. It may be in large, pure nuggets but more often must be separated from other minerals and soil.\nMost of the gold on Earth is deep inside the Earth's core because it is dense. Nearly all discovered gold was deposited on the surface by\u00a0meteorites.\nProperties.\nIn chemistry, gold is chemical element 79, a transition metal in Group 11. It has an atomic weight of 199.966 a.m.u. Its symbol is Au, from the Latin word for gold, \"aurum\". It is a \"noble metal\" meaning it has low chemical reactivity.\nGold is very soft. It is malleable, meaning a goldsmith can hammer it into thin metal sheets. It is also ductile, which means it can be pulled into wire. When it is used in money or in jewelry, it is often alloyed with silver or some other metal to make it harder.\nMost metals are gray in color. Gold is yellow because of the way its electrons behave. The only other metal in common use that has a non-gray color is copper. Caesium also has a gold-like color, but it is not commonly used as a metal because it reacts with water.\nGold is a fairly good electrical conductor, but not as good as copper or silver. Copper and brass electrical connectors, especially those used with computer and audio/video equipment, are often plated with gold for corrosion resistance.\nLanguage and culture.\nGold can mean that something or someone is very good or has done very well. A gold medal is often the given to the first-place winner in a race or other sports. Something that is in some way good may be given gold status.\nSafety.\nMetallic gold is non-toxic, which is unusual for a heavy metal. Soluble gold compounds, however, are toxic to the liver and kidneys. Gold is non-flammable, even in a pure oxygen environment or when finely powdered. It does not react with most household or laboratory chemicals. Gold is commonly processed with cyanide, which is highly toxic. Most of the cyanide is destroyed in the production process, so it is not present in the final product, but it can be a hazard to workers in a gold processing plant. Since gold conducts electricity, gold jewelry should never be worn when working with electricity."}
{"id": "3261", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3261", "title": "Century", "text": "A century is a way to describe a length of time. One century is one hundred years. The ancient Romans used the word \"centuria\" to describe a group of about one hundred soldiers, organized into a single unit.\nThe Roman numeral for 100 is \"C\". The word for 100 in Latin is \"centum\".\nA centenary is a celebration of something that happened 100 years ago. A bicentenary celebrates 200 years, a tercentenary 300 years.\nA centenarian is someone who is 100 years old or more.\nCentennial means something that happens every 100 years, or that lasts 100 years."}
{"id": "3262", "revid": "7167", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3262", "title": "SI base unit", "text": ""}
{"id": "3263", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3263", "title": "Meter", "text": ""}
{"id": "3264", "revid": "7651310", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3264", "title": "Kilogram", "text": "The kilogram is the base unit of mass in the International System of Units (SI). It is in widely used in science, engineering, and commerce worldwide. The kilogram is exactly the mass of one litre of water.\nAs of May 20, 2019, the definition of the kilogram is based on the Planck constant as .\nThere are attempts to define the kilogram in other ways. One example specifies a number of atoms of a certain substance (at a certain temperature).\nOne kilogram is a little more than 2.2 pounds. One tonne is one thousand kilograms. One litre of water weighs almost exactly one kilogram, at , at sea level. This was the basis of the definition of the gram in 1795.\nHistory.\nIn 1879, the piece of metal was made. It was officially chosen to be the kilogram in 1889. It was made of 90% platinum and 10% iridium. Those metals were chosen because they do not rust or corrode like most metals. It is stored in a vault at the BIPM in S\u00e8vres, France. From 1795 to 1799, the unit of mass was not called \"kilogram\" but was called \"grave\".\nThe original kilogram is kept inside bell jars. Over time, dust can collect on it. Before it is measured, it is cleaned to get the original size.\nMass and weight.\nThe kilogram is a unit of mass. In normal language, measuring mass defines how \"heavy\" is something. This is not scientifically correct. Mass is an \"inertial property\". It measures the tendency of an object to stay at a given speed when no force acts on it. \nSir Isaac Newton's laws of motion contain an important formula: \"F\" = \"ma\". \"F\" is force. \"m\" is mass. \"a\" is acceleration. An object with a mass (\"m\") of one kilogram will accelerate (\"a\") at one meter per second per second when acted upon by a force (\"F\") of one newton. This about one-tenth the acceleration due to earth\u2019s gravity.\nThe weight of matter depends on the strength of gravity. The mass of matter does not. The mass of an object is the same everywhere. Matter has invariant mass assuming it is not traveling at a relativistic speed with respect to an observer. According to Einstein\u2019s theory of special relativity, the relativistic mass (apparent mass with respect to an observer) of an object or particle with rest mass \"m\"0 increases with its speed as \"M\"=\u03b3\"m\"0 (where \u03b3 is the Lorentz factor). This effect is vanishingly small at everyday speeds, which are by orders of magnitude less than the speed of light, but becomes noticeable at very high speeds. For example, traveling at just 10% the speed of light with respect to an observer\u2014exceedingly fast compared to everyday speeds (about )\u2014increases an object\u2019s relativistic mass just over 0.5%.\nAs regards the kilogram, relativity\u2019s effect upon the constancy of matter\u2019s mass is simply an interesting scientific phenomenon that has zero effect on the definition of the kilogram and its practical realizations.&lt;/ref&gt; Objects are \"weightless\" for astronauts in microgravity. However, the objects still have their mass and inertia. Astronaut must use ten times as much force to accelerate a ten-kilogram object at the same rate as a one-kilogram object.\nA common swing, as shown in the picture, can show the relationship of force, mass and acceleration. Someone could push an adult on the swing. The adult would accelerate slowly. They would only swing a short distance forward before the swing would change direction. If a child is sitting on the swing, then the child would swing forward faster and further."}
{"id": "3265", "revid": "6965517", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3265", "title": "Feet", "text": ""}
{"id": "3266", "revid": "1020280", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3266", "title": "Second", "text": "The second (symbol: s), is a unit of time. There are around 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour, and 24 hours in a day. This tradition dates back to the Babylonian.\nIn science, a second is the time it takes for a caesium atom to vibrate 9,192,631,770 (around 9 billion) times. Scientists measure the second this way because the length of a day changes all the time. For example, when the dinosaurs lived, a day was about an hour shorter. Vibrations of atoms on the other hand always take the same time. This atomic second is also called the SI second.\nMetric prefixes are frequently combined with the word \"second\" to denote subdivisions of the second, \"e.g.\", the millisecond (one thousandth of a second) and nanosecond (one billionth of a second). Though SI prefixes may also be used to form multiples of the second (such as \u201ckilosecond\u201d, or one thousand seconds), such units are rarely used in practice. More commonly encountered, non-SI units of time such as the minute, hour, and day increase by multiples of 60 and 24 (rather than by powers of ten as in the SI system).\nOne heartbeat of an adult at rest, will last about one second. \nInternational second.\nUnder the International System of Units, the second is currently defined as the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium-133 atom. This definition refers to a caesium atom at rest at a temperature of (absolute zero). The ground state is defined at zero magnetic field. The second thus defined is equivalent to the ephemeris second.\nThe international standard symbol for a second is s (see ISO 31-1)\nEquivalence to other units of time.\n1 international second is equal to:\nThere are 31,536,000 seconds in a common year, 31,622,400 seconds in a leap year, and 31,557,600 seconds in a Julian year\nHistorical origin.\nOriginally, the second was known as a \"second minute\", meaning the second minute (i.e. small) division of an hour. The first division was known as a \"prime minute\" and is equivalent to the minute we know today. Third and fourth minutes were sometimes used in calculations.\nThe factor of 60 comes from the Babylonians who used a sexagesimal (base-60) numeral system. However, the Babylonians did not subdivide their time units sexagesimally (except for the day). The hour had been defined by the ancient Egyptians as either 1/12 of daytime or 1/12 of nighttime, hence both varied with the seasons. Greek astronomers, for example Hipparchus and Ptolemy, defined the hour as 1/24 of a mean solar day. Sexagesimally subdividing this mean solar hour made the second 1/86,400 of a mean solar day. \nGreek time periods, for example the mean synodic month, were usually specified quite precisely because they were \"calculated\" from carefully selected eclipses separated by hundreds of years\u2014individual \"mean\" synodic months and similar time periods cannot be measured. Nevertheless, with the development of pendulum clocks keeping \"mean time\" (as opposed to the \"apparent time\" displayed by sundials), the second became measurable. The seconds pendulum was proposed as a unit of length as early as 1660 by the Royal Society of London. The duration of a beat or half period (one swing, not back and forth) of a pendulum one metre in length on the Earth's surface is approximately one second.\nIn 1956 the second was defined in terms of the period of revolution of the Earth around the Sun for a particular epoch, because by then it had become recognized that the Earth's rotation on its own axis was not sufficiently uniform as a standard of time. The Earth's motion was described in Newcomb's Tables of the Sun, which provides a formula for the motion of the Sun at the epoch 1900 based on astronomical observations made between 1750 and 1892. The second thus defined is\nThis definition was ratified by the Eleventh General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1960. The \"tropical year\" in the definition was not measured, but calculated from a formula describing a tropical year which decreased linearly over time, hence the curious reference to a specific \"instantaneous\" tropical year. Because this second was the independent variable of time used in ephemerides of the Sun and Moon during most of the twentieth century (Newcomb's Tables of the Sun were used from 1900 through 1983, and Brown's Tables of the Moon were used from 1920 through 1983), it was called the ephemeris second.\nWhen atomic clocks were made, they became the basis of the definition of the second, rather than the revolution of the Earth around the Sun.\nFollowing several years of work, Louis Essen from the National Physical Laboratory (Teddington, England) and William Markowitz from the United States Naval Observatory (USNO) determined the relationship between the hyperfine transition frequency of the caesium atom and the ephemeris second. Using a common-view measurement method based on the received signals from radio station WWV, they determined the orbital motion of the Moon about the Earth, from which the apparent motion of the Sun could be inferred, in terms of time as measured by an atomic clock. As a result, in 1967 the Thirteenth General Conference on Weights and Measures defined the second of atomic time in the International System of Units (SI) as\nThe ground state is defined at zero magnetic field. The second thus defined is equivalent to the ephemeris second.\nThe definition of the second was later refined at the 1997 meeting of the BIPM to include the statement\nThe revised definition would seem to imply that the ideal atomic clock would contain a single caesium atom at rest emitting a single frequency. In practice, however, the definition means that high-precision realizations of the second should compensate for the effects of the ambient temperature (black-body radiation) within which atomic clocks operate and extrapolate accordingly to the value of the second as defined above.\nThe second in role-playing games.\nSometimes in role-playing games a second is used to refer to a small period of time or a single turn of combat. It is used as a standard moment of time, and does not necessarily refer to a real second, and could be shorter or longer depending on the scenario."}
{"id": "3267", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3267", "title": "Anthropologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "3271", "revid": "7855747", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3271", "title": "Orange (color)", "text": "Orange is a color. It is the combination of red and yellow.\nOrange is the color of an orange fruit, which is where the name of the color comes from. Before the orange fruit was introduced to England in the 1500s, this color was called \"yellow-red\". The first recorded use of \"orange\" as a color name in English was in 1512, in the court of King Henry VIII."}
{"id": "3276", "revid": "530613", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3276", "title": "Basque Country (greater region)", "text": "The Basque Country (Basque: Euskal Herria) is a region in Southwestern Europe that is within the borders of France and Spain.\nDescription.\nIt is the home of the Basque people. It is at the western end of the Pyrenees on the Bay of Biscay. Its boundaries are complicated, as it consists of seven districts: four within Spain and three within France. \nHistory.\nOrigins.\nNo one knows when the Basques came to Europe. Many say that they have been in Europe since the Neolithic period at the end of the Stone Age, but others say that they were here even earlier. \nThe first written information about the Basque Country is from the Roman times, when the Basque people already spoke their own language. During the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the Basque Country was isolated from the invading Goths.\nMiddle Ages.\nDuring the Muslim invasion of Southern Europe, the Basque Country split in two: the Castilian and the Navarrese lands. A war with France later split the Navarrese zone in two. \nAfter the Reconquista, the Castilian Basque lands and Navarre became part of the new country: Spain. Since then, Basque people from the Spanish area of the Basque Country have had their own government and have fought to gain the northern part of the Basque Country from France.\nNow.\nToday, three of the Basque districts in Spain (Araba, Bizkaia, and Gipuzkoa) form the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country. The political unit is one of 17 autonomous communities in Spain.\nThe fourth Basque district in Spain (Navarra) is its own separate autonomous community of Spain.\nThe three districts in the North (French) Basque Country are Lapurdi (Labourd), Nafarroa Beherea (Basse-Navarre) and Zuberoa/Xiberoa (Soule).\nPopulation.\nThe entire region has a surface area of 20,664\u00a0km2 (7978 sq mi). The Autonomous Community of the Basque Country has 7,234\u00a0km2 (2793 sq mi), and its population is about 2,000,000 - about 5% of the total population of Spain. Basque and Spanish are spoken, and its largest city is Bilbao although the capital is Vitoria-Gasteiz."}
{"id": "3278", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3278", "title": "M-theory", "text": "M-theory is a new idea in small-particle physics that is part of superstring theory that was initially proposed by Edward Witten. The idea, or theory, often causes arguments among scientists, because there is no way to test it to see if it is true. If ever proven true, M-theory and string theory would mean big progress for science.\nString theory.\nTo understand M-theory one must first have some knowledge of string theory. For hundreds of years, scientists have thought that the simplest objects in the universe are points, like dots. String theory says that this is wrong and that the simplest objects in the universe are shaped like pieces of string. These strings are so small that even when looked at very closely they look like points. Each basic particle is created by the strings vibrating in different patterns. The reason scientists had not thought of this idea for so long is that strings are much harder to work with than points. They seem to break such rules as causality and special relativity, which says that information cannot travel faster than the speed of light.\nString theory has been developed because of a very important problem that has existed for almost 100 years. Albert Einstein's theory that describes the universe on very large scales (it is called general relativity), and it disagrees with two theories that describe things on very small scales (they are called quantum mechanics and the standard model). There are also problems with the Standard Model: it includes about 20 numbers that seem to have no explanation; it has too many \"basic particles\" - some scientists think it needs to have fewer; and it does not include gravity, which is needed to explain weight.\nMany of these problems can be solved by thinking of basic particles as strings. Now there is only one number with no explanation, which gives the size of the strings. String theory includes particles that cause gravity, called gravitons; finding this out delighted the scientists who work on string theory. So, string theory successfully brings General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics together.\nBut there are some problems with string theory. Normally, we think of the universe as having 4 dimensions, or \"basic directions\". 3 of these basic directions can be thought of as \"up/down\", \"forward/backward\" and \"left/right\". The other direction is time. String theory needs 10 basic directions.\nThese six other directions can be explained if they are \"curled up\", so they are much too small to see. For example, by following the path of a spiral, it is possible to go a great distance along it without moving very far. The 6 other directions can be thought of as tiny spirals - strings can move along them a great distance but not seem to move. This can be looked at as a mathematical trick\u2014a trick that has little to do with the real world that can be seen and touched. Such tricks are allowed if they give a theory that can better tell us how things work.\nAnother problem with string theory is that there are 5 different versions of it. Each version allows different kinds of strings and says they work in different ways. String theory is supposed to be a \"theory of everything\" so there should be only one version, not 5. M-theory solves this problem.\nM-theory.\nIn 1995 Edward Witten started what has been called the \"Second Superstring Revolution\" by introducing M-theory to the world. This theory combines the 5 different string theories (along with a previously abandoned attempt to unify General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics called 11D-Supergravity) into one theory. What Witten actually did was to predict that the fact that all these different theories were connected was a result of there being some underlying theory of which they were all approximations. This theory is somewhat vague in nature and has not yet been pinned down.\nAdditionally, it was found that the equations that required string theory to exist in 10 dimensions were actually approximations as well. The proposed M-theory would need one extra dimension and instead be a theory that takes place in \"11 dimensions\". Witten has himself compared this idea in simple terms to a general who takes up a position on a hilltop, the extra space-coordinate, to get a better view of the battlefield's two other dimensions.\nThe combination is accomplished by knitting together a web of relationships between each of the string theories called dualities (specifically, S-duality, T-duality, and U-duality). Each of these dualities provides a way of converting one of the string theories into another. T-duality is probably the most easily explained of the dualities. It has to do with the size, written as R, of the curled up dimensions of the string theories. It was discovered that by taking a Type IIA string theory that has a size R and changing the radius to 1/R the result will end up being what is equivalent to a Type IIB theory of size R. This duality, along with the others, creates connections between all 5 (or 6, if supergravity is counted) theories. The fact that these dualities existed had been known before Witten came up with the idea of M-theory. \nAdditional amusement has come for many in guessing what the M might stand for (possibilities include Matrix, Magic, Muffin, Mystery, Mother and Membrane). Regardless of what the M might possibly mean, M-theory has become one of the most interesting and active areas of research in theoretical physics today.\n\"For a more technical explanation, see w:M-theory (simplified explanation).\""}
{"id": "3279", "revid": "7236", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3279", "title": "Jaguar Cars", "text": "Jaguar Cars was a car manufacturer and the Jaguar marque is now owned by Jaguar Land Rover. The original company was established in 1922 by William Lyons and was renamed Jaguar in 1935. Jaguar is known for its luxury saloons and sportscars.\nHistory.\nJaguar was a private company until it merged with the British Motor Corporation in 1966. The new company was called British Motor Holdings. In 1968 that company joined with Leyland Motors to became British Leyland. In 1975 British Leyland was nationalised. In 1984 Jaguar was made private again by Margaret Thatcher. Ford bought Jaguar in 1989. In 1999 it was made part of Ford's \"Premier Automotive Group\" along with Aston Martin, Land Rover, Volvo and Lincoln. In 2008, Ford sold Jaguar and Land Rover to Tata Motors. Jaguar is now a brand of the merged company called Jaguar Land Rover (JLR).\nThe company was originally in Blackpool, but moved to Coventry. Today Jaguar automobiles are made at the JLR factory in Castle Bromwich in Birmingham. In late 2018 was open new plant in Slovakia.\nJaguar owns the Daimler brand (not Daimler-Benz). Jaguar bought the British Daimler Company in 1960. Daimler became a brand for some of Jaguar's saloon automobiles, but is not used now.\nAs of 2017, JLR sells the following different Jaguar automobile ranges: XJ, XF, XE, XK, F-Pace, E-Pace, iPace, and the F-Type.\nSportscar racing.\nJaguar has won many sports car races, like the Le Mans 24 Hours and other races."}
{"id": "3280", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3280", "title": "Scientific method", "text": "Scientific method refers to ways to investigate phenomena, get new knowledge, correct errors and mistakes, and test theories.\nThe Oxford English Dictionary says that scientific method is: \"a method or procedure that has characterized natural science since the 17th century, consisting in systematic observation, measurement, and experiment, and the formulation, testing, and modification of hypotheses\".\nA scientist gathers empirical and measurable evidence, and uses sound reasoning. New knowledge often needs adjusting, or fitting into, previous knowledge.\nCriterion.\nWhat distinguishes a scientific method of inquiry is a question known as 'the criterion'. It is an answer to the question: is there a way to tell whether a concept or theory is science, as opposed to some other kind of knowledge or belief? There have been many ideas as to how it should be expressed. Logical positivists thought a theory was scientific if it could be verified; but Karl Popper thought this was a mistake. He thought a theory was not scientific unless there was some way it might be refuted. On the other hand, Paul Feyerabend thought there was no criterion. For him, \"anything goes\", or whatever works, works.\nScientists try to let reality speak for itself. They support a theory when its predictions are confirmed, and challenge it when its predictions prove false. Scientific researchers offer hypotheses as explanations of phenomena, and design experiments to test these hypotheses. Since big theories cannot be tested directly, it is done by testing predictions derived from the theory. These steps must be repeatable, to guard against mistake or confusion by any particular experimenter.\nScientific inquiry is generally intended to be as objective as possible. To reduce biased interpretations of results, scientists publish their work, and so share data and methods with other scientists.\nStages.\nScience and things that are not science (such as pseudoscience) are often distinguished by whether they use the scientific method. One of the first people to create an outline of the steps in the scientific method was John Stuart Mill.\nThere is no one scientific method. Some fields of science are based on mathematical models, such as physics and climate science. Other fields, such as many fields of social science, have rough theories and rely more on patterns that emerge from their data. Sometimes scientists focus on testing and confirming hypotheses, but open-ended exploration is also important. Some scientific fields use laboratory experiments. Others collect observations from real-world situations. Many areas of science are quantitative, emphasizing numerical data and mathematical analysis. But some areas, especially in social science, use qualitative methods, such as interviews or detailed observations of human or animal behavior. Focusing too much one kind of method can lead us to ignore knowledge produced using other methods.\nSome textbooks focus on a single, standard \"scientific method.\" This idea of a single scientific method is largely based on experimental, hypothesis-testing, quantitative areas of science. It doesn't apply very well to other areas of science. It is often written as a number of steps:\nAlthough written as a list, scientists may go back and forth between different steps a number of times before being satisfied with the answer.\nNot all scientists use the above \"scientific method\" in their day-to-day work. Sometimes the actual work of science looks nothing like the above.\nExample: dissolving sugar in water.\nLet's say we are going to find out the effect of temperature on the way sugar dissolves in a glass of water. Below is one way to do this, following the scientific method step by step.\nAim.\nDoes sugar dissolve faster in hot water or cold water? Does the temperature affect how fast the sugar dissolves? This is a question we might want to ask.\nPlanning the experiment.\nOne simple experiment would be to dissolve sugar in water of different temperatures and to keep track of how much time it takes for the sugar to dissolve. This would be a test of the idea that the rate of dissolving varies according to the kinetic energy of the solvent.\nWe want to make sure to use exactly the same amount of water in each trial, and exactly the same amount of sugar. We do this to make sure that the temperature alone causes the effect. It might be, for example, that the ratio of sugar to water is also a factor in the rate of dissolving. To be extra careful, we might also run the experiment so that the water temperature does not change during the experiment.\nThis is called \"isolating a variable\". This means that, of the factors which might have an effect, only one is being changed in the experiment.\nRunning the experiment.\nWe will do the experiment in three trials, which are exactly the same, except for the temperature of the water.\nDrawing conclusions.\nOne way that makes it easy to see results is to make a table of them, listing all of the things that changed each time we ran the experiment. Ours might look like this:\nIf every other part of the experiment was the same (we did not use more sugar one time than the other, we did not stir one time or the other, etc.), then this would be very good evidence that heat affects how fast sugar is dissolved.\nWe cannot know for sure, though, that there is not something else affecting it. An example of a \"hidden cause\" might be that sugar dissolves faster each time more sugar is dissolved into the same pot. This is probably not true, but if it were, it could make the results exactly the same: three trials, and the last one would be fastest. We have no reason to think that this is true at this time, but we might want to note it as another possible answer.\nReplication crisis.\nThe replication crisis (or replicability crisis) refers to a crisis in science. Very often the result of a scientific experiment is difficult or impossible to replicate later, either by independent researchers or by the original researchers themselves. While the crisis has long-standing roots, the phrase was coined in the early 2010s as part of a growing awareness of the problem.\nSince the reproducibility of experiments is an essential part of the scientific method, the inability to replicate studies has potentially grave consequences.\nThe replication crisis has been particularly widely discussed in the field of psychology (and in particular, social psychology) and in medicine, where a number of efforts have been made to re-investigate classic results, and to attempt to determine both the validity of the results, and, if invalid, the reasons for the failure of replication.\nRecent discussions have made this problem better known.\nHistorical aspects.\nElements of scientific method were worked out by some early students of nature."}
{"id": "3281", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3281", "title": "Plymouth Argyle F", "text": ""}
{"id": "3283", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3283", "title": "Gas", "text": "A gas is one of the four most common states of matter. In a gas the molecules move freely and are independent of each other. This makes it different from a liquid where the molecules are loosely attached. It is also different from a solid where the bonds are strong and hold the molecules together.\nIn a pure gas, each molecule may be made of an individual atom. It may be elemental, where each molecule is made of more than one of the same atom bound together. It may be compounds where molecules are made of many types of atoms together. An example of a monoatomic gas is neon, an example of an elemental gas is hydrogen and an example of a compound gas is carbon dioxide.\nA gas mixture contains a mix of any of the above types, for example air which is 87% nitrogen, 0.2% oxygen and 13.7% argon and carbon dioxide.&lt;0.0009&gt;&lt;/33.3456333&gt;\nPoison gases were used as chemical weapons in War I but were later banned. gas is a natural mixture of methane and other gases.\nPhysical Characteristics.\nAll gases can flow, like liquids. This means the molecules move about independently of each other. Most gases are colourless, like hydrogen. Gas particles will spread about, or diffuse, in order to fill all the space in any container such as a bottle or a room. Compared to liquids and solids, gases have a very low density and viscosity. We cannot directly see most gases since they aren't coloured. However it is possible to measure their density, volume, temperature and pressure.\nPressure.\nPressure is the measure of how much pushing force something is putting on another object. In a gas, this is usually the gas pushing on the container of the object or, if the gas is heavy, something inside the gas. Pressure is measured in pascals. Because of Newton's third law, we can change the pressure of a gas by putting force on the object containing it. For example, squeezing a bottle with air inside pressurises (gives more pressure) to the air inside.\nWhen talking about gas, pressure is often related to the container. A lot of gas in a small container would have very high pressure. A small amount of a gas in a big container would have low pressure.\nGas can create pressure itself when there is a lot of it. The weight of the gas creates pressure on anything underneath it, including other gas. On a planet, this is called atmospheric pressure.\nTemperature.\nThe temperature of a gas is how hot or cold it is. In physics it is usually measured in kelvins although degrees Celsius are used more elsewhere. In a gas, the average velocity (how fast they move) of the molecules is related to the temperature. The faster the gas molecules are moving, the more they collide, or smash into each other. These collisions release energy, which in a gas comes in the form of heat. Conversely if the temperature around the gas becomes hotter then the gas particles will convert the thermal energy to kinetic energy, making them move faster and making the gas hotter.\nState changes.\nA gas can go through two different state changes. If the temperature is low enough the gas can condense and turn into a liquid. Sometimes, if the temperature is low enough it can go through deposition, where it changes straight to a solid. Normally a gas must first condense to a liquid, and then freeze to become a solid, but if the temperature is very low it can skip the liquid stage and instantly become solid. Frost on the ground in winter is caused by this. Water vapour (a gas) goes into the air which is very cold, and instantly becomes ice due to deposition."}
{"id": "3284", "revid": "7766860", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3284", "title": "Family", "text": "A family is a group of people who, in most cases, live together. They share their money and food and are supposed to take care of one another. Its members are either genetically related (like brother and sister) or legally bound to each other, for example by marriage. In many cultures, the members of a family have the same or a similar surname.\nThe family in accordance to the Catholic doctrine is treated in many articles of the Catechism of the Catholic Church starting from the article 2201. \nA family is said to be society's smallest unit, its nucleus. Family life is more private and intimate than public life. But in most countries there are laws for it. For example, there are restrictions for marrying within the family and bans for having a sexual relationship with relatives, especially with children.\nTypes of families.\nThree types of family 0n the basic of size\nare: \"nuclear family\", \"single-parent family\" and \"extended family\".\nBoth the \"nuclear family\" and the \"single-parent family\" are also called the \"immediate family\". \nFoster families are families where a child lives with and is cared for by people who are not his or her parents.\nCloseness.\nSome family members are related closer to each other. Consanguinity is a way of measuring this closeness. \nNotes:"}
{"id": "3285", "revid": "7363560", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3285", "title": "Wave (physics)", "text": "A wave is a kind of oscillation (disturbance) that travels through space and matter. Wave motions transfer energy from one place to another.\nExamples.\nWaves are found everywhere in the natural world. Examples of waves are:\nProperties.\nWaves have properties that can be measured. All waves can be pictured by adding sine waves.\nSine waves can be measured too. The shape of a sine wave is given by its amplitude, phase, wavelength and frequency. The speed that the sine wave moves can be measured. The amplitude and wavelength of the sine wave are shown in the picture.\nThe highest point on a wave is called the crest. The lowest point is called the trough. The crest of a wave and the trough of a wave are always twice the wave's amplitude apart from each other. The part of the wave halfway in between the crest and the trough is called the baseline.\nComplicated waveforms (like the sound waves of music) can be made by adding up sine waves of different frequencies. This is how mp3 audio files are converted from their compressed form into the music we can hear. Complex waves can be separated into sine waves by Fourier analysis.\nWaves and matter.\nSome waves can move through matter while others cannot. For instance, some waves can move through empty space, light waves for example. Sound waves, on the other hand, cannot move through empty space. Inherently, all waves carry energy from one place to another when they move. In some applications of technology, waves may carry meaningful information from one place to another, such as news on the radio. \nUsually, after a wave moves through matter, the matter is the same as it was before the wave was introduced, though in some cases, matter can be affected by waves traveling through it. In 1922, Louis de Broglie found out that all waves are also particles, and all particles are also waves.\nTypes.\nIn matter:"}
{"id": "3286", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3286", "title": "Weapon", "text": "A weapon is an object that can be used to attack or injure a person or animal. People have used weapons since very ancient times. While other animals use weapons, in most cases they are attached to the animal (teeth, claws, tusks, etc.). In man's case they are detached and constantly selected for the purpose at hand. Man has been constantly developing newer and better weapons ever since he picked up the first rock.\nHistory.\nSome of the oldest remains that we have of ancient people are weapons made of stone. Ancient people also used spears. Bows and arrows were in use by about 20,000 BC. During the Bronze age people learned to make things of metal, many people used swords. People also built huge machines which could throw rocks to destroy the defensive walls of enemy cities. Some of these machines were called catapults or siege engines. Later, gunpowder was invented in China and the Europeans began using it to make guns and cannons. These weapons were much better than the older weapons, and helped the Europeans to conquer people in many parts of the world. People in many parts of the world used guns such as rifles and shotguns for hunting animals, and handguns for shooting other people.\nPeople continued to invent new weapons. In 1884 the machine gun was invented, which could shoot many bullets very fast. Soldiers began to use land mines, a bomb hidden in the ground, which explodes when someone walks on it. Small submarines were able to use torpedos to attack bigger ships and hide under the ocean. When airplanes were invented, people began to use them to shoot enemies and to drop bombs on them. They built tanks which had big guns and strong armor. Poison gas was used in World War I but was outlawed and rarely used afterwards. \nIn World War II, cities were heavily bombed from the air and Nazi Germany used V-2 missiles to carry bombs to England. Both sides used many firebombs. At the end of World War II, the United States used atomic bombs (nuclear bombs) to destroy the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. \nAfter World War II, people continued to develop new weapons, including intercontinental ballistic missiles. People became concerned about weapons of mass destruction, weapons that can kill many people very fast, and are usually cheap and easy to make and use. One kind of weapon of mass destruction is poison gas. New kinds of poison gas, such as nerve gas, are much more powerful than the old kinds. Another kind of weapon of mass destruction is disease germs, which could be used to make many people sick and maybe kill them. \nLaws.\nOld-fashioned weapons still kill many people in wars and fighting. In wars in Africa in the 1990s and early 21st century, many people were killed with machetes (big knives). People sometimes try to make laws, treaties, and international agreements to try to control weapons because they are worried about all the killing done with them. Laws vary from country to country, for example, in the United States, the \"right to keep and bear arms\" is guaranteed to all citizens by the Constitution. A country may say that people in that country cannot keep or use guns, or only when the government allows it. The laws of war forbid certain weapons, and countries may agree with each other that they should not use certain weapons against each other, or should not have more than a certain number of particular kinds of weapons.\nTypes of weapons.\nThings specifically made as weapons that most ordinary people can carry, include non lethal:\nWeapons that soldiers or police personnel carry, include:\nWeapons that the defense people of a national government have, include:\nOther types of weapons include:"}
{"id": "3287", "revid": "7155929", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3287", "title": "Christmas cake", "text": "A Christmas cake is a heavy cake containing much dried fruit and usually having a covering of icing. It is made to be eaten at Christmas. It can also be called a fruitcake.\nA common favorite of many is the traditional Scottish Christmas cake, the \"Whisky Dundee.\" It was named this because the cake came from Dundee and is made with Scotch whisky. It is a light and crumbly cake, and light on fruit and candied peel\u2014only currants, raisins, sultanas and cherries. This Christmas cake is mostly good for people who do not like very sweet and moist cakes. As with all fruitcakes, almonds (or other nuts) can be removed by people who do not like them or those with bad nut allergies.\nAt the other end of the Christmas cake tradition, the apple cream Christmas cake is a sweet mix of sliced apples, raisins and other fruit, with eggs, cream cheese, and heavy whipping cream.\nIn the middle of the other two listed above is the mincemeat Christmas cake. It is simply any traditional or vegetarian mincemeat mixed with flour, eggs, and other pastry ingredients, to transform it into a cake batter; or it can also be steamed as a Christmas pudding.\nA premade fruitcake mix can be bought at a grocery store."}
{"id": "3288", "revid": "7865046", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3288", "title": "Christmas cracker", "text": "A Christmas cracker is a hollow card tube covered with brightly coloured paper twisted on each end. When pulled apart, it makes a pop sound. It usually contains a small gift, a paper crown hat and a joke. It is generally used at Christmas celebrations, usually shared by two family members to compete by tugging on each end until it breaks apart, the person who retains the tube containing the gift gets to keep the gift. It is a British tradition which started back in the 1840s."}
{"id": "3290", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3290", "title": "Fingerplate", "text": "A fingerplate is a plate that is fixed to a door near the handle or keyhole. It is for stopping dirt getting on the door. It is made of metal or glass."}
{"id": "3291", "revid": "470168", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3291", "title": "Floodlight", "text": "A floodlight is a large electric light. It makes a very strong and bright beam of light. It is used for lighting the outside of buildings, football grounds, etc. at night."}
{"id": "3292", "revid": "268071", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3292", "title": "Headrest", "text": "A headrest is something which supports the head. It is usually a suitably shaped part of the back of a chair or of a front seat in a car.\nIt is designed to support passenger's shoulder part and neck to prevent whiplash in cases of crash at the rear."}
{"id": "3293", "revid": "6137628", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3293", "title": "Inkpad", "text": "An inkpad is a small box that contains a pad of cloth or other material. It is impregnated with ink (the pad is inky). A marker is pressed onto the pad, then onto paper. Any raised marks on the pad leave an impression in ink on the paper.\nInk pads are used with rubber stamps. On the stamp is the symbol of an organisation, for example. After a form has been passed by an official, it is stamped to show it is authentic. Another variation is a date stamp, placed on all letters which arrive in the building. Another version is a stamp with a facsimile (copy) of an official's signature. Using this, staff can send out letters when the official is not present. Rubber stamps and ink pads have been used for at least a hundred years by civil servants and businesses. They are still in use in many countries, but are gradually being replaced with other systems."}
{"id": "3295", "revid": "1020280", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3295", "title": "Jack-in-the-box", "text": "A jack-in-the-box is a children's toy which is a box from which a figure on a spring jumps when the top is opened. You twist the knob until the spring shoots out the toy, which you put back in the box and do it all over again. Many kids have fun when they see the jack jumping out from the box."}
{"id": "3296", "revid": "215", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3296", "title": "Chritmas cake", "text": ""}
{"id": "3297", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3297", "title": "London boroughs", "text": "A London Borough is a district of London. There are 33 of them, including two that also call themselves cities - the City of Westminster (where Buckingham Palace and the Houses of Parliament are) and the City of London (the oldest part of London). Each Borough has its own local government.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "3299", "revid": "7878814", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3299", "title": "City of London", "text": "The City of London is a district of Greater London. The City's boundaries have remained almost unchanged since the Middle Ages. Although it is now only a small part of the metropolis, it is a notable part of central London. The City holds city status in its own right, and is also a separate ceremonial county. Often referred to as the City, or the Square Mile, it is just over one square mile, in area. \nIt is here in the City of London where most of the United Kingdom's financial trade is done. It is a very small area, covering only a square mile, and has a very small resident population (8,000). However, many people come to work here and during the day it can be very busy, with some 300,000 people in it.\n\"London\" now refers to Greater London, which is made up of 32 boroughs (including the City of Westminster and the City of London. The City is in central London and is the oldest part of the city, dating back to Roman times. The City of London has its own mayor, the Lord Mayor of London, an office separate from (and much older than) the Mayor of London. There are other ancient features, dating back to medieval times. The City has its own police force, the City of London Police.\nFinancial markets.\nThe City vies with New York City as the financial capital of the world: many banking and insurance institutions have their headquarters there. The London Stock Exchange (shares and bonds), Lloyd's of London (insurance) and the Bank of England are all based in the City. \nOver 500 banks have offices in the City, and the City is an established leader in trading in Eurobonds, foreign exchange, energy futures and global insurance. The Alternative Investment Market, a market for trades in equities of smaller firms, is a recent development. In 2008, the City of London accounted for 4% of UK GDP.\nLondon is the world's greatest foreign exchange market, with much of the trade conducted in the City of London. Of the $3.98 trillion daily global turnover, as measured in 2007, trading in London accounted for around $1.36 trillion, or 34.1% of the total. The Pound Sterling, the currency of the United Kingdom, is globally the fourth most traded currency and the third most held reserve currency.\nSince 1991 Canary Wharf, a few miles east of the City in Tower Hamlets, has become a second centre for London's financial services industry and houses many banks and other institutions formerly located in the Square Mile. This development does not appear to have damaged the City: growth has continued in both locations.\nHistory.\nThe City is the site of Roman \"Londinium\", and the archaeological remains are on display in the Museum of London, City Wall.\nThe City has many churches designed by Sir Christopher Wren, including St Paul's Cathedral. The City was the site of the Great Fire of London in 1666."}
{"id": "3301", "revid": "1070978", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3301", "title": "City of Westminster", "text": "The City of Westminster is a city and London borough. It is to the west of the City of London. Its most important area, Westminster, contains the Houses of Parliament, Whitehall, Downing Street and Westminster Abbey."}
{"id": "3302", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3302", "title": "London Borough of Lambeth", "text": "The London Borough of Lambeth is a London Borough. It is in south west London, England."}
{"id": "3303", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3303", "title": "London Borough of Southwark", "text": "The London Borough of Southwark is a London Borough. It is in south east London."}
{"id": "3304", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3304", "title": "London Borough of Camden", "text": "The London Borough of Camden is a London Borough. It is in north and central London."}
{"id": "3305", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3305", "title": "London Borough of Merton", "text": "The London Borough of Merton is a London Borough. It is in south west London. In the London Borough of Merton there is the towns of Morden, Wimbledon, Mitcham and other small towns like Pollards Hill, Colliers Wood and Summerstown."}
{"id": "3306", "revid": "7495047", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3306", "title": "Brixton", "text": "Brixton is a place in south London. It has a lot of people from the Caribbean. It has a big market and many nightclubs."}
{"id": "3307", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3307", "title": "Bankside", "text": "Bankside is the old part of the London Borough of Southwark. It is next to the River Thames."}
{"id": "3308", "revid": "1079008", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3308", "title": "River Thames", "text": "The River Thames is a large river in England. It goes through London the capital city of the United Kingdom.\nThe Thames is 346 kilometres (235 statute miles) long. Its source is near the village of Kemble in the Cotswolds; it flows through Oxford (where it is called \"The Isis\", a shortening of its Latin name), Reading, Maidenhead, Eton and then Windsor.\nFrom the outskirts of Greater London, it passes Syon House, Hampton Court Palace, Richmond (with the famous view of the Thames from Richmond Hill), and Kew. It then passes through London, then Greenwich and Dartford before it enters the sea in an estuary, The Nore. Part of the area west of London is sometimes called the Thames Valley. The area east of Tower Bridge is called Thames Gateway by development agencies and officials.\nAbout 90\u00a0kilometres from the sea, above London, the river begins to show the tide caused by the North Sea. It is said that London was made capital of Roman Britain at the spot where the tides reached in 43 AD, but different things have pushed this spot farther up the river in the over 2000 years since then. At London, the water is slightly salty with sea salt.\nHistory.\nLike the Celts who lived in the area, the Romans called the river \"Thamesis\".\nThe Thames was an important way to go between London and Westminster in the 16th and 17th centuries. The guild of watermen took Londoners back and forth by ferry. One of them, John Taylor, the Water Poet (15801653), described the river in a poem.\nIn the 17th and 18th century, at a time some call the \"Little Ice Age\", the Thames often froze over in the winter. This led to the first \"Frost Fair\" in 1607, with a tent city set up on the river with lots of odd amusements, like ice bowling. The last time the river froze over was in 1814. The building of a new London Bridge in 1825 may have helped stop it from freezing: the new bridge had fewer pillars than the old, allowing the river to flow more easily, and stopping it from flowing slowly enough to freeze in cold winters.\nBy the 18th century, the Thames was one of the world's busiest waterways, as London became the centre of the very big British Empire. During this time one of the worst river disasters in England took place on 3 September 1878 on the Thames, when the crowded pleasure boat \"Princess Alice\" crashed into the \"Bywell Castle\" killing over 640 people.\nIn the 'Great Stink' of 1858, pollution in the river became so bad that the House of Commons at Westminster had to quit sitting. \nThe authorities accepted a proposal from the civil engineer Joseph Bazalgette. He moved the effluent eastwards along a series of interconnecting sewers. These sloped towards outfalls beyond the metropolitan area.\nThe coming of rail transport and road transport, and the decline of the Empire in the years after 1945, made the river less important than it was. London itself is no longer used much as a port, and the \"Port of London\" has moved down the river to Tilbury. The Thames has been greatly cleaned up, and life has returned to its dead waters.\nIn the early 1980s, the Thames Barrier was opened to control flooding. It is used many times a year to stop water damage to London's low-lying areas up the river.\nThere are many bridges and tunnels crossing the Thames, including Tower Bridge, London Bridge, Lambeth Bridge, and the Dartford Crossing.\nIn September 2011 a British comedian, David Walliams, swam the entire 140\u00a0mile length of the river raising over \u00a31million for a charity called Sport Relief. On Red Nose Day, people swim the Thames for charity.\nThe Thames in literature.\nMany books have been written about the Thames. \"Three Men in a Boat\" by Jerome K. Jerome describes a boat trip up the Thames. Somewhere near Oxford is where the Lidells were rowing in the poem at the start of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\". Somewhere near here was where Alice fell asleep in the book. The river is named in both \"The Wind in the Willows\" and the play \"Toad of Toad Hall\". In \"Heart of Darkness\" by Joseph Conrad, Marlow tells his tale while waiting for the tide near the mouth of the Thames.\nOther fictional events include Sherlock Holmes looking for a boat in \"A Study in Scarlet\" and Bill Sykes killing Nancy just near the river, in Charles Dickens's classic novel \" Oliver Twist\".\nCrossings of the Thames.\nSee Crossings of the River Thames for a full article. Famous crossings include\nIslands in the Thames.\nListed in upstream order."}
{"id": "3309", "revid": "7727540", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3309", "title": "Queen", "text": "A queen is a woman who rules a country, because of inheritance. A queen usually comes to power after the death of the previous king or queen, who is her parent. A country that is ruled by a queen is called a kingdom \u2013 the same as a country ruled by a king. \nThe wife of a king is also called a queen. However, the husband of a queen is not always called a king. For example, the last King of Britain (George VI) had a wife (Elizabeth), who was called Queen Elizabeth. He had no sons, so he was followed by his elder daughter, who is also called Elizabeth. She became Queen Elizabeth II. She was married to The Duke of Edinburgh until his death on April 9, 2021; but when she became Queen he did not become King.\nMany people who study government think a country should not have a monarchy. They argue that rulers ought to be elected, or that monarchs are often corrupt. Aristotle\u2019s \u201cPolitics\u201d compares the different forms of government which a state may have. He claims monarchy to be one of the worst regimes because one leader may be easily corrupted, even if they were selected as the most wise and deserving ruler of an entire group. \nMany people in countries such as the UK want to keep their royal family as they have remained a traditional icon and source of income for the country. However, in the UK their influence in the rule of the country is very small, leaving government to the governing political party elected by the people. This is because in a constitutional monarchy the monarch has only the power of head of state.\nQueen regnant.\nA \"queen regnant\" is head of state, and has all the powers of a sovereign.\nA queen regnant does not keep the title of queen if she \"abdicates\" (resigns). No queen has ever abdicated in the history of the United Kingdom, but three abdications have occurred in the Kingdom of the Netherlands:\nQueen consort.\nA \"queen consort\" is the wife of a king. She is not the head of state, and does not have any powers unless they are given by the King or another law.\nThe last King of Britain (George VI) had a wife (Elizabeth) who was called Queen Elizabeth. He had no sons, so he was followed by his elder daughter. She is also called Elizabeth and became Queen Elizabeth II. She was married to the late Duke of Edinburgh; but when she became Queen he did not become King.\nQueen dowager.\nA \"queen dowager\" is the widow of a king.\nA queen consort usually keeps the title of Queen after her husband's death, for example"}
{"id": "3310", "revid": "407690", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3310", "title": "Male", "text": "Male is one of two genders. Most species have two sexes male and female. Human males are men or boys; human females are women or girls. \nThe two sexes have different sexual organs, and different secondary sex characteristics. They also often have different biological functions. The female gives birth to children with the semen provided by the male. In many human societies, females often were involved in gathering, while men used to hunt."}
{"id": "3311", "revid": "407690", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3311", "title": "Female", "text": "Female is a gender. It is the sex that produces ova (\"egg\" cells) for sexual reproduction. Females of some species also bear offspring.\nWhen looking at seed plants, the plants that only produce seed are called female, those that only produce pollen are called male. The majority of seed plants produce both, and are called hermaphrodite.\nOrganisms can either be grouped as male or female. Female humans are called women and their bodies are different from male humans (who are called men). A woman has a vagina between her legs (a male has a penis) which is the main sexual organ. They also have breasts with milk glands, which allow them to nurse (feed) infants. A woman's shoulders are usually not as wide as a man's, but women usually have wider hips than men, because they need wide hips to be able to give birth.\nWomen who become pregnant are encouraged by doctors to seek professional care from an obstetrician or a gynecologist in order to prevent problems. Likewise, women should see a gynecologist often for routine screening exams for cancer."}
{"id": "3312", "revid": "39458", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3312", "title": "Camden", "text": "Camden is a place in north London, England. It has a big market which has lots of clothes. It is also good for music. It is an Urban Area. Regent's Canal runs through Camden."}
{"id": "3313", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3313", "title": "Royal Borough of Greenwich", "text": "The Royal Borough of Greenwich is a London Borough. It is in south east London."}
{"id": "3314", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3314", "title": "London Borough of Wandsworth", "text": "The London Borough of Wandsworth is a London Borough. It is in south west London."}
{"id": "3315", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3315", "title": "London Borough of Islington", "text": "The London Borough of Islington is a London Borough. It is north of Central London."}
{"id": "3316", "revid": "7650529", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3316", "title": "Bambuco", "text": "Bambuco is a type of music from Colombia. The beat of this music is like the European waltz or polska. Bambuco is often folk music. There is a dance that goes with Bambuco music. It is a group dance and has a 6/8 or 3/4 meter.\nSometimes Bambuco is called \"el bambuco\". People think Bambuco started in Africa. It is popular in the Andean region of Colombia and throughout Latin America."}
{"id": "3317", "revid": "7844599", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3317", "title": "Christmas", "text": "Christmas (which means \"The Mass of Christ\") is a Christian holiday that refers to the birth of Jesus (whom Christians believe is the Son of God), and a cultural holiday for non-Christians.\nThe day known as Christmas Day is celebrated on the 25th day of December. It is one of the most important days of the year for Christians, along with Easter when the death and resurrection of Jesus are celebrated. The season of preparing for Christmas is called Advent and begins on a Sunday about four weeks before Christmas. The Christmas Season (called Christmastide) ends 6 January or the Twelfth Day of Christmas, in which \"Epiphany\" is remembered.\nChristmas is celebrated all over the world, as a religious holiday or as a time of celebration by Christians and non-Christians alike. The traditions are different from country to country, but they nearly always include a feast, giving gifts or cards, and enjoying church or public festivities such as singing Christmas carols and songs. Santa Claus is a tradition in many countries of the world.\nChristmastide, as it is often called, is in the winter of the Northern Hemisphere, at a time when there were already ancient festivals. Some of the traditions that are used for Christmas are older than Christmas, or come from other non-Christian traditions such as Yule. Modern traditions of Christmas often focus on the giving of gifts. The season for retail stores to sell gifts, food, greeting cards, Christmas trees, and decorations begins the day about a month before Christmas Day.\nThe history of Christmas.\nChristmas in the Gospels.\nChristmas celebrates the birth of Jesus. The story of how this happened is told in part of the Bible known as the Gospels. There are four Gospels telling the life of Jesus. The Gospel of Luke tells the most about his birth, and the Gospel of Matthew tells another part of the story. The Gospel of John says that Jesus came from God to bring his \"Word\" or message to all people.\nThe Gospels say that many years before Jesus' birth, prophets had told a promise to the Jewish people that God would send them a Messiah, or holy teacher. Christians believe that the promised Messiah was Jesus. His mother was a young woman called Mary, who was engaged, but not yet married to a carpenter called Joseph. Joseph found out that Mary was pregnant and was upset. He was wondering what he should do, when an angel came from God to tell him that the baby was the Holy One. The angel said that he must \"name the baby\". This was a sign that he would take care of it like his own child.\nAt this time, the Middle East was ruled by the Romans. An order came that all the people had to travel back to their home town, to put their names on the taxation lists. Joseph took his new wife to Bethlehem. There was nowhere for them to stay, except a stable where the animals slept. This is where the baby was born. Joseph called him Jesus, as the angel had said.\nThe baby Jesus had two lots of visitors. On the night he was born, angels told some shepherds in the fields that they would find a newborn king lying in an animals' feed bin (or \"manger\"). Jesus' other visitors were some wise men who saw a new star in the sky and followed it, until they found the house where the family was now living and gave the young child expensive gifts of gold, incense and a precious herb called myrrh. (The wise men are often traditionally called the Three Kings, because there were three very expensive presents but the Bible does not say how many wise men there were.)\nAll these parts of the Christmas story are remembered and celebrated in different ways at Christmas: in pictures, songs, plays, stories and in models that are called \"cribs\", \"creches\" or \"presepe\".\nDate of celebration.\nMost Christian countries of the world use a calendar called the Gregorian Calendar, but some churches use a calendar called the Julian Calendar. Most Christians, such as those of the Catholic and Protestant Churches, celebrate the birth of Jesus on 25 December, although holidays begin on 24 December also known as Christmas Eve.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church still uses the Julian Calendar in some regions such as Russia. In such regions, Christmas is celebrated on 25 December in the Julian Calendar, but because of the difference between the calendars it is 7 January in the modern Gregorian Calendar.\nSome Christians, like Jehovah's Witnesses, do not celebrate Christmas because there is no instruction from Jesus in the Bible which tells Christians to celebrate his birth. Mormons celebrate Christmas on 25 December but they believe that Christ's actual birth took place on 6 April.\nSome believe that Jesus was probably not born on 25 December. Some historians believe this date was used by the Catholic Church to replace the pagan rites that took place at that time of the year.\nAdvent.\nThe Season of Advent, which begins on Sunday about four weeks before Christmas Day, is celebrated by the Catholic and Anglican Churches, as well as others. It is a time for people to prepare themselves for two different things: for the coming of the baby Jesus and Christmas, and for the second coming of Jesus, when he shall rule over all the Earth in peace. Not all Christian people remember Advent. Some people use it as a time of fasting, study, meditation and prayer. Special Advent Calendars are made for children, with pictures or treats for each day of Advent.\nGenerally, Advent is a time when many people are very busy in preparation for Christmas Day, cleaning and decorating, buying food and presents, writing cards and letters, and cooking the Christmas feast.\nCelebrations.\nBefore the 4th century AD, Christians could only worship and celebrate in secret. The feast of Christmas probably began while Constantine was the Emperor of Rome, because it was he who made Christianity a legal religion and built some of Rome's oldest churches. Some old stone coffins or \"sarcophagi\" from this time are carved with pictures of Mary and baby Jesus and the Wise Men.\nThrough the Middle Ages Christmas was celebrated with feasting, singing and plays. The plays were held in churches, and also in castles and in market places, where a big hay wagon was sometimes used as a stage.\nBecause Advent was a time of prayer and preparation, most parties were held after Christmas, rather than before it. The main pre-Christmas celebration was the Feast of St. Nicholas on 6 December. In some countries, particularly the Netherlands, the tradition grew for children to receive presents on this day, rather than Christmas Day. The name of Saint Nicholas is now remembered in many countries as Santa Claus.\nAnother festivity that takes place is the Feast of Saint Lucy (St. Lucia Day) on 13 December which is particularly celebrated in Scandinavia, where girls take part in candlelit processions, and the daughters of the house must rise early to bring coffee or chocolate to the family.\nFor many centuries, the celebration of Christmas often began with a church service or mass, which lasted from late at night to after midnight on Christmas morning. Christmas Day was a time of feasting. On the following day, the Feast of Saint Stephen people from rich households would carry boxes of food out to the street for the poor and hungry. Many people would go back to work but employers would give gifts of money to their workers. The Holy Days continued with the feast of Saint John and Holy Innocents' Day. The feasting and parties ended on the Feast of the Epiphany, the day of the Three Wise Men, often called the \"Three Kings\". The season is nowadays remembered by the song \"The Twelve Days of Christmas\". William Shakespeare wrote a play to be performed as part of the celebration, called \"Twelfth Night\".\nFor many, Christmas has become a time when having parties, sending messages to family and friends and giving presents has become more important than the celebration of Jesus' birth. Manufacturers and stores have responded to the feasting and present-giving with lots of advertising, decorations and displays. In the US, the Christmas displays are put up right after Thanksgiving, late in November. In some countries such as Australia, stores put up decorations at the beginning of November. Given that Jesus himself called people making money in the Jewish Temple 'robbers' (Matthew 21:13) many Christians are uneasy about profit instead of prophets at Christmas.\nTown councils celebrate by decorating streets and squares, and providing Christmas entertainment for shoppers. In countries of the Southern Hemisphere, where Christmas falls in Summer, there is a tradition of open-air Carol Services, often organised by the town council, which are attended by thousands of people.\nMany Christians celebrate Christmas by attending church, and with prayers and singing. And each year there are Bible readings from the Gospels that tell the story of the birth of Jesus.\nChristmas Traditions.\nChristmas traditions are of several types. There are traditions of the church, traditions which are public celebrations and traditions that are kept by families. These traditions are different in different times, places, cultures and even families.\nTraditions of the Church.\nThe celebration of Christmas is a very important time for churches. Almost every church has special services or celebrations. Here are some of the ways that churches celebrate Christmas.\nThe Crib.\nIt is the custom in many churches to set up a Crib (or \"Creche\") scene of the \"Nativity\" or birth of Jesus. The first scene of this type was set up by St. Francis of Assisi in the 13th century. They have been very popular in Italy ever since then, and the custom has spread to other countries.\nNativity scenes can be large with life-sized statues, or they can be tiny enough to fit in a matchbox. They are made of many different things including carved and painted wood, brightly coloured ceramics (pottery), painted paper glued to boards, and mixtures of material with clay, wood, cloth, straw and metal used for different parts.\nThe Advent wreath is a circle of leaves, usually pine boughs, ivy and holly, with 4 (or sometimes 5) candles in it which is hung up in a church. The candles are lit on each Sunday in Advent, and the central candle is lit on Christmas morning. Churches are often decked with green branches and leaves, and many churches also have a Christmas tree.\nCarols by Candlelight.\nA popular tradition in many churches is the Carol Service which is often lit only by candles. The carol service generally has lots of singing and Bible readings. There is a tradition in England which began in the Temple Church in London and has now spread to many other places for a service of Nine Lessons and Carols. The lessons are Bible readings. Some carols are sung by a choir and others by the choir and people (the congregation). Every year one of these services is recorded in a large English Church, often King's College Chapel, Cambridge, and is broadcast on radio and television to be enjoyed by people who love good music and carol singing, but particularly for people who cannot go to a Christmas service.\nPublic and commercial celebrations.\nMany cities and towns celebrate Christmas by putting up decorations. These may be banners and bunting which are strung from buildings or lampposts. They may be Christmas lights which can also decorate buildings and street trees. Many large cities put up a huge Christmas tree in a public place, such as those in Trafalgar Square in London, Times Square in New York and Martin Place in Sydney. This is often combined with an appeal to the people of the city to give money or gifts to help the poor and needy.\nIn many cities, the usual shopping hours are made longer before Christmas so that workers have more time to buy Christmas food and presents. Shop windows are often decorated with Christmas scenes, with large department stores often having animated scenes to entertain children. Shopping malls and big stores often have a Santa Claus, who sits on a throne, while children tell him what they want for Christmas, and have their photos taken.\nMany towns hold Christmas parades, street entertainment and concerts. Some towns have a tradition of carols with a choir and entertainers in the town hall, while in Australia and New Zealand, these concerts of Christmas entertainment and carols are usually held outdoors, in parks or even on beaches, with families bringing picnics. The arrival of Santa Claus at the end of the evening is accompanied by a firework display.\nA traditional part of Christmas is the theatre entertainment. This includes the performance of classical music such as Handel's Messiah as well as orchestral concerts and band recitals. Pantomimes are often played at Christmas and favourites include \"Peter Pan and Wendy\" and \"Cinderella\". Many children's movies are released during the Christmas season.\nBecause many people feel very lonely, hungry and sad at Christmas, many cities, churches, charities and service organisations try to help the poor and lonely by providing Christmas food and gifts for poor families, and Christmas parties for people who are hungry or who are lonely and without any friends or family.\nFamily celebrations.\nFamily celebrations are often very different from each other, depending on where a family comes from, and the customs that have grown in particular families.\nFamily get-togethers.\nMost families think of Christmas as a time to get together with other members of the family. People often travel from far away to be with other family members at Christmas. Those people who cannot travel often make long-distance phone calls on Christmas Day. Many people also see Christmas as a time to reach out to others that they know might be lonely, and invite them to dinner on Christmas Day. Christmas is seen as a time for people of all ages to have fun together, for cousins to get to know each other, for grandparents to see their grandchildren and for the family to admire the babies that have been born during the year. Big family parties are usually a time of joy, but some families often talk about their disagreements and have big fights at Christmas time.\nFamily traditions are very different. Some families might all go off to church together, to a Carol Service, a Midnight Mass, or a Christmas Morning service. Some families are pulled out of bed very early by children who want to open their presents. In other families, presents are given on St. Nicholas Day, on Christmas Eve or not until after church on Christmas morning. The Christmas feast might start on Christmas Eve, with a special breakfast on Christmas morning, or at midday on Christmas Day.\nSome families have a tradition of carol singing, and might go around the streets, to hospitals and other such places singing with members of their church. Other families like to watch certain television programs together, which might include carol services and the Queen's Message. Some families use Christmas as a time to play music and sing together, or to read a favourite book such as \"A Christmas Carol\" by Charles Dickens. In countries in the Southern Hemisphere, a visit to the beach or a swim in a pool is often part of the Christmas Day tradition.\nChristmas dinner.\nChristmas Dinner, usually eaten in the middle of the day, is an important part of the family celebration. The food differs from country to country and also from family to family. In the Northern Hemisphere, roasted meat and vegetables is generally the main course of the meal. Usually one of several types of meat are served, which may include turkey, chicken, ham, roast beef or lamb. There are often several courses, with special treats that are usually only eaten at Christmas.\nIn English-speaking countries, the traditional dessert is Christmas plum pudding. Nowadays these puddings are often bought from bakers, but many people make their own to a family recipe. The tradition came from the Middle Ages when the pudding was used to preserve some of the fruit from the autumn until the mid-winter. A traditional pudding is baked six weeks before Christmas and is left tied up in a cloth or basin with a cloth covering, in a cool place. Stirring the pudding is sometimes a family tradition, with everyone making a wish as they stir. Traditionally a silver coin would be stirred into the pudding, to bring luck to the person who found it. Nowadays most coins cannot be used because they are not made of silver so taste horrible and may be poisonous. Some families use old coins or silver charms. On Christmas Day the pudding must be boiled in a pot for several hours. When it is served, the cloth is cut off, brandy is poured onto the pudding, and it is set on fire before it is carried to the table. Christmas crackers are used to decorate and are often opened prior to serving dish or starter course. It is usually served with hard sauce.\nMany families have a Christmas cake or a special bread instead of a pudding (or as well as a pudding). These are very different depending on the country, but often have marzipan which is made from almonds and is traditional in many countries at Christmas. In France \"Buche de No\u00e4l\" or gingerbread men and women are decorated and hung on the Christmas tree. In Scotland a pastry biscuit called shortbread is made and has become a popular tradition in many countries. A German tradition is \"pfeffernuss\", spiced cookies rolled in powdered sugar. Other Christmas food includes raisins, sultanas, ginger, Greek baklava, almonds, chocolates, caramel toffee, candy canes and oranges.\nMany families also prepare mulled wine which is warmed with cinnamon and nutmeg or egg nogs, a sweet drink made of milk, sugar, eggs, nutmeg and sometimes alcohol.\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, the traditional roast dinner is often replaced with cold cuts of meat, and served with salads. The first course might be prawn cocktail or a cold soup like borsch. The plum pudding might be served with ice cream. White wine and beer are both served cold (beer is kept in a refrigerator). Christmas dinner may be served on the veranda, or sometimes as a picnic.\nTree and decorations.\nIn most homes when Christmas is celebrated, people set up a Christmas tree in the house. This old Yuletide custom began in Germany as the \"Tannenbaum\" (German for \"Fir Tree\"). These are traditionally evergreens, the best type being the Fir Tree which does not shed its needles or lose its fragrance. The tree may be a cut tree that is bought from a plantation or taken from the forest. Artificial trees are sometimes preferred to real trees. The Christmas tree is decorated with lights, shiny coloured balls, sparkly tinsel and other ornaments. A wreath of leaves or pine is often put on the front door of a house as a sign of welcome. Other plants that have special significance at Christmas are holly which is used as decoration and mistletoe which is hung in the centre of a room. The tradition is that people who meet under the mistletoe must kiss.\nMany people decorate their homes at Christmas time. These decorations and the Christmas tree are generally inside, but may be put where they can also be seen through a window by people passing by. In the mid 20th century there grew up a custom for decorating the outside of houses as well. These decorations may be just a few lights around the porch, or hundreds of lights and colourful Christmas figures decorating the whole house and garden. Some neighbourhoods hold competitions for the best-decorated house, and driving around the streets to look at them has become another family tradition.\nCards and presents.\nThe giving of gifts at Christmas comes from several different ideas. One is that God gave his son, Jesus, to the world at Christmas. There is also the story of the Wise Men who came to the baby Jesus with three gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh. For many centuries it has been the custom for people to give small gifts at Christmas, and also to give generously to the poor and needy to help them through the winter. Another tradition has become linked to this one, and the result is the tradition of Santa Claus, or Father Christmas as he is sometimes called, and who is nowadays thought by many children to be the bringer of presents and happiness.\nIn the 4th century, in a Greek village that is now part of Turkey, there was a good man who would secretly given presents to the poor to help them. He became a bishop and is called Saint Nicholas. Over the centuries, he became a very popular saint and lots of churches were named after him. He was very popular in places where there were lots of sailors. One of those places was the Netherlands. In the Netherlands and many other European countries, presents are given on the feast of Saint Nicholas, 6 December. Traditionally, the presents are not big, and are sometimes hidden, or have a funny joke or poem that must be read. In many towns of Europe a man dressed in bishop's robes comes on a horse or in a boat, acting as St. Nicholas. His name was often shortened to Sante Claus, or Santa Claus in English.\nIn English speaking countries, where presents are usually given on Christmas Day, not 6 December, Santa Claus, (or Father Christmas) is usually thought of as coming on Christmas Night, when his magic sleigh is pulled across the sky by reindeer, and he comes into houses through the chimney. While in Europe, children put out their shoes for St. Nicholas, the English tradition is to hang up stockings (or long socks) in front of the fireplace. Santa Claus would traditionally fill the socks or shoes with nuts, raisins, chocolates and an orange. Nowadays children usually get much more expensive presents, and hang up pillow cases or have the presents in a big pile under the Christmas tree.\nAnother Christmas tradition is the sending of cards to friends and relatives. These contain warm greetings and may also have a letter telling all the things that have happened to the person or family during the year."}
{"id": "3318", "revid": "7486888", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3318", "title": "Adjective", "text": "An adjective is a word that describes a noun or pronoun. Nouns are words that name a place, a person, a thing, or an idea. An adjective is a word that gives more information about the noun that goes with it. It is a part of speech. \nOften, the adjective is before the noun it describes. Sometimes an adjective is not followed by a noun:\nAn adjective is a word that gives instant information about a noun to make a clear picture of the noun in the mind of the reader and create a feeling to the writer.\nComparative and superlative.\nSometimes there are different forms of the same adjective. If one joke makes a person laugh more than another joke, then that joke is funnier. This is called the comparative form. The day that is colder than any other is the coldest day. This is the superlative form of \"cold\". Some adjectives need additional words when we want to compare them. For instance, one car may be cheaper than another, but the second car may be more reliable (we use \"more reliable\", instead of \"reliabler\"). Reliable means worthy of trust.\nThe rule is:\nFor short adjectives ending in a consonant like \"cold,\" \"black,\" or \"fast,\" one adds the suffix er to make a comparison of greater magnitude. Example: \"The North Pole is colder than Florida.\" The greatest possible comparison is made by adding the suffix est. Example: \"The North Pole is the coldest place on the Earth.\" For long adjectives like intelligent, conscientious, comprehensive, one uses the word more to make a comparison of greater magnitude. Example: \"Children are more intelligent than adults.\" \nA superlative makes the greatest possible comparison. One uses the word most. Example: \"She is the most conscientious person I have ever known.\"\nNouns as noun modifiers.\nIn the English language, it is possible for a noun to modify (describe) another noun. Example: take the noun \"angel\" and the noun \"face.\" Put them together and the result is \"angel face.\" The first noun is acting as an adjective, because it is giving us information about the second noun.\nAdjectives and adverbs.\nAdjectives are words we use to describe the noun. Simple words like \"warm\" and \"fat\" are adjectives commonly used in writing. One can make adverbs from some adjectives by adding the suffix ly. Example: take the adjective \"beautiful,\" the adverb is beautifully. One can do it the other way around: take an adverb like \"presumably,\" the adjective is \"presumable\". \"Presumable innocence\" means the accused is assumed to be innocent until proven guilty.\nThe adjective \"guilty\" becomes the adverb \"guiltily\" and vice versa (the opposite), the adverb \"guiltily\" becomes the adjective \"guilty.\"\n100 Adjectives used in Basic English.\n \u2022 acid \u2022 angry \u2022 \u2022 beautiful \u2022 black \u2022 boiling \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 brown \u2022 \u2022 chemical \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 clear \u2022 \u2022 complex \u2022 \u2022 cut \u2022 deep \u2022 dependent \u2022 \u2022 elastic \u2022 electric \u2022 equal \u2022 fat \u2022 fertile \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 flat \u2022 free \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 general \u2022 good \u2022 \u2022 gray \u2022 hanging \u2022 happy \u2022 \u2022 healthy \u2022 high \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 kind \u2022 like \u2022 living \u2022 long \u2022 male \u2022 married \u2022 material \u2022 medical \u2022 military \u2022 natural \u2022 necessary \u2022 new \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 parallel \u2022 past \u2022 physical \u2022 political \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 private \u2022 \u2022 quick \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 red \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 right \u2022 round \u2022 \u2022 second \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 sharp \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 straight \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 sweet \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 \u2022 true \u2022 violent \u2022 warm \u2022 wet \u2022 wide \u2022 wise \u2022 yellow \u2022 "}
{"id": "3319", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3319", "title": "Paper", "text": "Modern paper is a thin material of (mostly) wood fibres pressed together. People write on paper with a pencil or pen, and books are made of paper. Paper can absorb liquids such as water, so people can clean things with paper. There are many types of paper.\nThe pulp and paper industry comprises companies that use wood as raw material and produce pulp, paper, board and other cellulose-based products.\nPaper making.\nModern paper is normally made from wood pulp. Wood is ground up and mixed with water and other chemicals to make a thin liquid called \"paper pulp\". Paper pulp can be bleached to make paper more white, and dyes can be added to make colored paper. This pulp is pressed into sheets of paper. Printing is often done on paper before the paper is cut into sheets. Newsprint paper (newspaper) comes in a huge roll, and goes through the printing process as one continuous sheet. It is cut by a machine-driven guillotine blade later. Folding comes last, then packing for distribution. \nSometimes paper is made heavier and more glossy (shiny) by adding clay, and by 'milling' it. Milling is done by squeezing the paper through a series of rollers. Sometimes paper is made from used or waste paper: this is recycling.\nNot all paper is made from wood. Other kinds of fiber can be used. People still make paper from cotton, linen and hemp for special purposes.\nHistory of paper.\nWriting started long before the invention of paper. People wrote on many kinds of material. They wrote on cloth, on the stone walls and on wood. In Mesopotamia the Sumerians wrote on clay tablets, many of which have survived today. In Europe, people wrote on vellum.\nFirst paper.\nMany centuries ago\u00a0\u2013\u00a0as early as the 3rd millennium BC (that's over 2000 BC)\u00a0\u2013\u00a0people in Egypt made a kind of paper from the papyrus plant. This is where the word 'paper' comes from. The people of Greece and Rome learned to do this too. The Romans wrote on parchment (made from animal skin), on waxed tablets and on wood (see Vindolanda).\nIn China 105 AD, the eunuch Cai Lun told his Emperor he had made paper. They had previously used bamboo and silk. The material used in this ancient paper included cotton rags, hemp, various plant fibres and old fish nets. The oldest existing paper with writing on it was found in the ruins of a watchtower in the Great Wall of China. It dates to about 150 AD.p5 Even earlier paper (but with no writing on it) has been claimed: \"The oldest surviving piece of paper in the world is made of hemp fibers, discovered in 1957 in a tomb near Xian, China, and dates from between the years 140 and 87 BC\". Paper-making was regarded by the Chinese as so valuable that they kept it secret as long as they could.\nSpread of paper.\nPeople in Japan learned how to make paper with fibres of the mulberry tree, around 610 AD. This is called Japanese paper or \"Washi\". The Chinese invention spread to India, and then to the Middle East, and then to Italy.\nAn opportunity occurred after The Battle of Talas in 751. Then an Arab army captured soldiers of the Chinese. There were some paper makers among the captured soldiers. From them, paper-making spread throughout the Islamic world. In 757, a paper mill was built at Samarkand. People learned to use linen as paper raw material and to use starch made from flour as an additive.\nThe Italians used hemp and linen rags. In 1276 the first Italian paper mill was built at Fabriano and, until the 14 century, Italy was a paper supplier in Europe. In 1282 the first watermark was introduced in Bologna.\nMachine-made paper.\nPaper was hard to make. It was cheaper than the old writing materials, but still expensive. A mechanical paper maker was conceived in France 1798, but invented in England. At least one paper mill was using them by 1812. Now the process was cheaper but the raw material was still expensive.\nIn 1840 Friedrich Gottlob Keller Invented a machine that could make pulp for paper out of wood fibres (instead of the expensive rag paper). Paper became cheap enough for everyone to buy. Around the same time, other inventions were made, like the pencil, the fountain pen, and a printing press that used steam power. With this new information technology, people wrote more letters, made more books and newspapers, and kept more records of what they did.\nToday, some of the largest paper-producing countries are China, USA, Canada, Finland, Sweden and Russia. Paper is produced in large factories called \"paper mills\". They produce hundreds of thousands of tons of paper each year.\nUses of paper.\nPaper is used for writing and printing. Books, magazines and newspapers are printed on paper.\nPaper is often used for money. Paper used for money is made in special ways. It does not use wood fiber. It is mostly cotton with additives to make it hard for people to print their own money. A piece of paper money is called a banknote, a bill or a note.\nPaper can be used for cleaning. Special forms of paper are used, such as paper towels, facial tissues or toilet paper.\nPretty paper can be used as decoration. It can be pasted onto the walls of a room; this is called wallpaper. Paper can be used to wrap gifts. This is called wrapping paper or gift wrap.\nSome kinds of paper are strong and can be used in boxes and other packaging material. Sometimes several layers of paper are held together with glue, to make cardboard."}
{"id": "3321", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3321", "title": "Materials", "text": ""}
{"id": "3322", "revid": "968255", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3322", "title": "Physical power", "text": ""}
{"id": "3323", "revid": "1059624", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3323", "title": "Power", "text": "Power has different meanings when talking about different subjects:"}
{"id": "3325", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3325", "title": "States of matter", "text": "There are four common states of matter (or \"phases\") in the universe: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma. \nThe state of matter affects a substance's properties. Examples of those properties include density, viscosity (how well it flows), malleability (how easy it is to bend), and conductivity. Changes between states of matter are often reversible.\nCommon states of matter.\nSolids.\nIn a \"solid\", the positions of atoms are fixed relative to each other over a long time. That is due to the cohesion or \"friction\" between molecules. This cohesion is provided by metallic, covalent or ionic bonds. Only solids can be pushed on by a force without changing shape, which means that they can be resistant to deformation. Solids also tend to be strong enough to hold their own shape in a container. Solids are generally denser than liquids. Solid becoming a gas is called sublimation.\nLiquids.\nIn a \"liquid\", molecules are attracted to each other strongly enough to keep them in contact, but not strongly enough to hold a particular structure. The molecules can continually move with respect to each other. This means that liquids can flow smoothly, but not as smoothly as gases. Liquids will tend to take the shape of a container that they are in. Liquids are generally less dense than solids, but denser than gas.\nGases.\nIn a \"gas\", the chemical bonds are not strong enough to hold atoms or molecules together, and from this a gas is a collection of independent, unbonded molecules which interact mainly by collision. Gases tend to take the shape of their container, and are less dense than both solids and liquids. Gases have weaker forces of attraction than solids and liquids. Gas becoming a solid directly is called deposition.\nGases can sometimes turn directly into solids without passing through a fluid stage. That is called desublimation. You see it in the hoary frost which forms on window-panes in cold climates. It is the reverse of sublimation.\nPlasmas.\n\"Plasmas\" are gases that have so much energy that electrons of an atom cannot stay in orbit around one atomic nucleus. The atomic ions and free electrons mix around like a hot soup.\nBecause the positive and negative charged particles are not stuck together, plasma is a good conductor of electricity. For example, air is not good at conducting electricity. However, in a bolt of lightning, the atoms in air get so much energy that they no longer can hold on to their electrons, and become a plasma for a brief time. Then an electric current is able to flow through the plasma, making the lightning.\nPlasma is the most common state of matter in the universe. Both stars and the interstellar medium are mostly made of plasma.\nPhase changes.\nPhases of matter can be changed by a number of things. The most common ones are temperature and pressure. Substances usually become a gas at warm temperatures and/or low pressures, become a solid at cool temperatures, and become a plasma at extremely hot temperatures. Substances often become liquid in between solid and gas, but when the pressure is very low (such as the vacuum of outer space) many substances skip the liquid phase, going directly from solid to gas or vice versa. Scientists have created graphs called phase change diagrams to show the relationship between pressure, temperature, and phase of many substances.\nWhen a solid becomes a liquid, it is called melting. When a liquid becomes a solid, it is called freezing. When a solid becomes a gas, it is called sublimation. When a gas becomes a solid, it is called desublimation. When a liquid becomes a gas, it is called evaporation. When a gas becomes a liquid, it is called condensation.\nThe freezing point and the melting point are said to be the same, because any increase in temperature from that point will cause the substance to melt, while any drop in temperature will cause it to freeze. Likewise, the vaporization and condensation points (or the sublimation and desublimation points) always match. In most substances, as the pressure increases, the vaporization/condensation point also increases, or vice versa. For example, the boiling point of water decreases as you go up a mountain, because the air pressure is lower. The relationship for freezing and melting can go in different directions depending on the substance.\nOther states.\nMany other states of matter can exist under special conditions, including strange matter, supersolids, and possibly string-net liquids. Scientist work on experiments at very high or very low temperatures to learn more about phases of matter.\nCondensates.\nBose-Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates are phases of matter that apply to particles called bosons and fermions, respectively. (More than one boson can exist in the same spot at the same time. Only one fermion can exist in the same spot at the same time). Bose-Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates occur at incredibly low temperatures. All of the particles in these condensates begin to act like one big quantum state, so they have almost no friction or electrical resistance.\nDegenerate matter.\nWhen the core of a star runs out of light elements (like hydrogen or helium) to sustain fusion, the core will collapse into a very dense state called \"degenerate matter\". Everything is packed very tightly and can barely move. If the star isn't too heavy, it becomes a white dwarf. In a heavier star, the pressure is so intense that even the protons and electrons are crushed, and it becomes a neutron star.\nQuark-gluon plasmas.\nThe protons and neutrons that make up atoms are made of even smaller things called quarks (which are \"glued\" together by things called \"gluons\"). At incredibly high temperatures over 2 trillion Kelvin, quarks and gluons turn into another state of matter. Humans can make a little bit of quark-gluon plasma in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, but it doesn't last long before cooling down.\nSupercritical fluids.\nWhen a substance has enough temperature and pressure at the same time, called the critical point, you can't tell the difference between very dense gas and very energetic liquid. This is a supercritical fluid, and it behaves like both liquid and gas.\nSuperfluids.\nSuperfluids, on the other hand, only happen at very low temperatures, and only for a few special substances like liquid helium. Superfluids can do things that regular liquids cannot, like flowing up the side of a bowl and getting out."}
{"id": "3326", "revid": "48755", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3326", "title": "Perimeter", "text": "In geometry, perimeter is the distance around a flat object. For example, all four sides of a square rhombus have the same length, so a rhombus with side length 2 inches would have a perimeter of 8 inches (2+2+2+2=8).\nFor a polygon, the perimeter is simply the sum of the length of all of its sides. For a rectangle, the perimeter is twice the sum of its length and width (formula_1). Perimeter can also be calculated for other planar figures, such as circle, sector and ellipse.\nReal-life objects have perimeters as well. A football field, including the end zones, is 360 feet long and 160 feet wide. This means that the perimeter of the field is 360+160+360+160=1040 feet.\nThe perimeter of a circle is usually called the circumference. It may be calculated by multiplying the diameter times \"Pi\". Pi is a constant which is approximately equal to 3.14159; however, the places to the right of the decimal are endless. The number of places used depends on the accuracy required for the result."}
{"id": "3328", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3328", "title": "Nation", "text": "A nation is a group of people who share the same culture, history, language or ethnicity. It can also be described as people living in the same country and government.\nThe word \"nation\" comes from a Latin language word meaning \"birth\" or \"place of birth.\" The adjective is national.\nSome nations are people with a particular belief, such as the Vatican City, or ethnic group, such as Armenia. Others share an idea, such as Democracy in the United States or Communism in China. \nSome nations are controlled by a small minority who have all the power, such as Saudi Arabia, who hold the nation together with the use of this power.\nSome of these may also be combined. The highest lawful authority of most nations is a constitution, which is a document which states clearly what kinds of power the rulers have and how new laws must be made. Many others are ruled by a single person who holds an \"office\" (position), such as a King or Pope, or from a long legal tradition without an official Constitution, such as the United Kingdom."}
{"id": "3331", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3331", "title": "Matrix", "text": "Matrix can mean:"}
{"id": "3332", "revid": "48755", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3332", "title": "Metal", "text": "Some chemical elements are called metals. They are the majority of elements in the periodic table. These elements usually have the following properties:\nMost metals are solid at room temperature, but this does not have to be the case. Mercury is liquid. Alloys are mixtures, where at least one part of the mixture is a metal. Examples of metals are aluminium, copper, iron, tin, gold, lead, silver, titanium, uranium, and zinc. Well-known alloys include bronze and steel.\nThe study of metals is called metallurgy.\nThe ways that metals are alike (properties of metals).\nMost metals are hard, shiny, they feel heavy and they melt only when they are heated at very high temperatures . Lumps of metal will make a bell-like sound when they are hit with something heavy (they are sonorous).\nHeat and electricity can easily pass through a metal (it is conductive). A lump of metal can be beaten into a thin sheet (it is malleable) or can be pulled into thin wires (it is ductile). Metal is hard to pull apart (it has a high tensile strength) or smash (it has a high compressive strength). If you push on a long, thin piece of metal, it will bend, not break (it is elastic). Except for cesium, copper, and gold, metals have a neutral, silvery color.\nNot all metals have these properties. Mercury, for instance, is liquid at room temperature, Lead, is very soft, and heat and electricity do not pass through iron as well as they do through copper.\nUse of metals.\nMetals are very useful to people. They are used to make tools because they can be strong and easy to shape. Iron and steel have been used to make bridges, buildings, or ships.\nSome metals are used to make items like coins because they are hard and will not wear away quickly. For example, copper (which is shiny and red in color), aluminium (which is shiny and white), gold (which is yellow and shiny), and silver and nickel (also white and shiny).\nSome metals, like steel, can be made sharp and stay sharp, so they can be used to make knives, axes or razors.\nRare metals with high value, like gold, silver and platinum are often used to make jewellery. Metals are also used to make fasteners and screws. Pots used for cooking can be made from copper, aluminium, steel or iron. Lead is very heavy and dense and can be used as ballast in boats to stop them from turning over, or to protect people from ionizing radiation.\nAlloys of metals.\nMany things that are made of metals may, in fact, be made of mixtures of at least one metal with either other metals, or with non-metals. These mixtures are called alloys. Some common alloys are:\nPeople first began making things from metal over 9000 years ago, when they discovered how to get copper from its ore. They then learned how to make a harder alloy, bronze, by adding tin to the copper. About 3000 years ago, they discovered iron. By adding small amounts of carbon to iron, they found that they could make a particularly useful alloy \u2013 steel.\nMetals in chemistry.\nIn chemistry, metal is a word for a group of chemical elements that have certain properties. It is easy for the atoms of a metal to lose an electron and become positive ions, or cations. In this way, metals are not like the other two kinds of elements - the nonmetals and the metalloids. Most elements on the periodic table are metals.\nOn the periodic table, we can draw a zigzag line from the element boron (symbol B) to the element polonium (symbol Po). The elements that this line passes through are the metalloids. The elements that are above and to the right of this line are the nonmetals. The rest of the elements are the metals.\nMost of the properties of metals are due to the fact that the atoms in the metal do not hold onto their electrons very tightly. Each atom is separated from the others by a thin layer of valence electrons.\nHowever, some metals are different. An example is the metal sodium. It is soft, melts at a low temperature, and is so light, it floats on water. People should not try this though, because another property of sodium is that it explodes when it touches water.\nMost metals are chemically stable, and do not react easily but some do react. The reactive ones are the alkali metals like sodium (symbol Na) and the alkaline earth metals like calcium (symbol Ca). When metals do react, they often react with oxygen. The oxides of metals are basic. The oxides of nonmetals are acidic.\nCompounds, which have metal atoms combined with other atoms to make molecules, are probably the most common substances on Earth. For example, common salt is a compound of sodium.\nMetals in history.\nThe use of metals is said to be one of the things that makes people different from animals. Before they used metals, people made tools from stones, wood, and animal bones. This is now called the Stone Age.\nNo-one knows when the first metal was found and used. It was probably what is called native copper, which is sometimes found in large lumps on the ground. People learned to make this into copper tools and other things, although, for a metal, it is quite soft. They learned smelting to get copper from common ores. When copper was melted over fire, people learned how to make an alloy called bronze, which is much harder and stronger than copper. People made knives and weapons from bronze. This time in human history, after about 3300\u00a0BC is often called the Bronze Age, that is, the time of bronze tools and weapons.\nAround the year 1200\u00a0BC some people learned to make iron tools and weapons. These were even harder and stronger than bronze and this was an advantage in war. The time of iron tools and weapons is now called the Iron Age\nMetals have been very important in human history and civilization. Iron and steel were important in the making of machines. Gold and silver were used as money in order to allow people to trade, that is, exchange goods and services over long distances.\nMetals in astronomy.\nIn astronomy, a metal is any element other than hydrogen or helium. This is because these two elements (and sometimes lithium) are the only ones that form outside stars. In the sky, a spectrometer can see the signs of metals and show the astronomer the metals in a star.\nBiological role in humans.\nIn humans, some metals are essential nutrients like iron, cobalt, and zinc. Some metals can be harmless such as ruthenium, silver, and indium. Some metals can be toxic in large amounts. Other metals such as cadmium, mercury, and lead, are very poisonous. Sources of metal poisoning include mining, tailings, industrial wastes, agricultural runoff, occupational exposure, paints and treated timber."}
{"id": "3333", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3333", "title": "German", "text": "German can mean different things.\nWhen talking about a person, it can mean someone who lives in Germany, or someone who thinks of himself or herself as 'German'."}
{"id": "3334", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3334", "title": "Indonesia", "text": "Indonesia, () officially the Republic of Indonesia, (; ; ) is a nation in Southeast Asia and Oceania. As the biggest archipelago country in the world, Indonesia has 18,108 islands. The most important islands of Indonesia are Java, Bali, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, and Sumatra. The capital of Indonesia is Jakarta, on the island of Java. The current president is Joko Widodo. Modern Indonesia began on the 17th of August 1945. At 10 o'clock on that Friday morning, Sukarno read Indonesia's Declaration of Independence. Indonesia's Independence Day is a national holiday.\nIndonesia is the fourth most populated country in the world with 238,452,952 people (2004 est.) Half of the population lives in Java, There are 111 people per km2. The land area is 1.904 million km2, or slightly smaller than Mexico. The official national language of Indonesia is Bahasa Indonesia, but 749 native languages are also spoken in different parts of Indonesia, and widely native languages spoken in Indonesia include Javanese, Balinese, and Sundanese. Indonesia's neighbors are Australia to the south, Singapore to the northwest, and Philippines to the northeast. Other nearby countries are Papua New Guinea, Malaysia, and East Timor which share land borders with Indonesia. \nIndonesia has the most active volcanoes of any country in the world. It is also close to fault lines so there are many earthquakes and tsunamis.\nMost people in Indonesia follow Islam, but Indonesia is not an Islamic country by law. Indonesia has the largest Muslim population on earth. Other religions Indonesians follow include Christianity (Protestanism and Catholicism), Hinduism, Buddhism and Kong Hu Cu.\nHistory.\nPre World War II.\nIndonesia has a written history as far back as the 7th century and a much longer oral history. Before the colonial Dutch came in the 1596, much of what is now Indonesia was many different kingdoms. Often they were fighting each other. \nIndonesia was colonized by the Netherlands in the 17th century and renamed the Dutch East Indies. During this time, the Dutch captured thousands of Malagasy people from Madagascar and forced them to work on pepper plantations in their colonies as slaves. The Dutch treated the islands like their property until World War II. \nDuring World War II, the Japanese drove out the Dutch and took control of Indonesia. After Japan surrendered in the war, Indonesia claimed its independence on the 17th of August 1945. The proclamation was read by Sukarno in Jakarta. Sukarno later became Indonesia's first President.\nBritish troops came into Indonesia to restore peace and to rescue Europeans who had been prisoners of the Japanese. The British troops also had the job of shipping home 300,000 Japanese troops. The Indonesian Republicans fought the British troops, because it was expected that the British would give Indonesia back to the Dutch. The Indonesian Republicans killed many of the Japanese prisoners, before they could be sent home. They also began killing people from minority groups who might be against the new Republic. Many European and Indonesian European people were killed. Many Chinese business people and other minority groups were killed or made homeless. In Java there were many thousands of homeless people.\nIn 1946, the Dutch came back. When the British left in 1947, there were 55,000 Dutch soldiers in Indonesia. The Dutch action was called \"Operatie Product\" or \"Politionele Acties\". The Indonesian Republicans fought the Dutch until 1949. But the Indonesian Republicans were badly organised and often fought among themselves. As the Dutch forced the Republican soldiers out of different areas, they moved in more troops until there were 100,000 Dutch troops. The Dutch refused to obey the United Nations who said they should stop the fighting in Indonesia. The United States of America organised for meetings between Dutch and Indonesian leaders. The Dutch finally agreed to recognise Indonesia's independence in November 1949.\nBecause of the fighting and the bad organisation, it took a long time for the country to become peaceful, and for the economy to get better. Many Indonesian soldiers had died, between 45,000 and 100,000. Also, a very large number of civilians, Indonesians, Europeans and Chinese, had died; perhaps as many as 200,000.\nProvinces.\nIndonesia has 34 provinces. Five of them have special status. Each province has its own legislature and governor. The provinces are divided into regencies (\"kabupaten\") and cities (\"kota\"). These are further divided into districts (\"kecamatan\"), and again into village groupings (either \"desa\" or \"kelurahan\"). \nIndonesian provinces and their capitals\u00a0\u2013 listed by region\nSumatra\nJava\nLesser Sunda Islands\nKalimantan\nSulawesi\nMaluku Islands\nWestern New Guinea\nPeople and culture.\nThere are people of many different cultural groups living in Indonesia, has more than 700 ethnic groups. It is affected by Indians, Chinese people, Arabs, Malays and Europeans. The Javan hawk-eagle is the national bird."}
{"id": "3335", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3335", "title": "Properties", "text": ""}
{"id": "3336", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3336", "title": "Property", "text": "Property is something that is owned by someone. If someone buys a car, the car becomes their property. People who deal with buying or selling real estate will often talk about \"properties\", meaning houses, apartments, offices etc."}
{"id": "3337", "revid": "105299", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3337", "title": "Crusade", "text": ""}
{"id": "3340", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3340", "title": "Renegades", "text": ""}
{"id": "3343", "revid": "196884", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3343", "title": "NEWI Cefn Druids F.C.", "text": "NEWI Cefn Druids Football Club (they used to be called Flexsys Cefn Druids) are a Welsh football (soccer) team.\nThey play in the Welsh League"}
{"id": "3344", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3344", "title": "Aberystwyth Town F.C.", "text": "Aberystwyth Town Football Club are a Welsh football (soccer) team.\nThe club was started in 1884. They play at the Park Avenue stadium in Aberystwyth. They play in the Welsh League. They came third in the Welsh league in 1992 but have only had success at a regional level."}
{"id": "3346", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3346", "title": "German language", "text": "German (German: \"Deutsch\") is a West Germanic language. It is spoken in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Luxembourg; natively by around 100 million people. It is the most widely spoken mother tongue in the first language. There are some people who speak German in Belgium and in the Netherlands and in France and Northern Italy. There are people who speak German in many countries, including the United States and Canada, where many people emigrated from Germany. It also spoken in Eastern Europe, Bulgaria, Romania, and Russia.\nGerman is a part of the West Germanic language family and is much like English and Dutch. Much of the vocabulary in German is related to English, but the grammar is more complicated.\nGerman has a system of cases, and when helping verbs are used, the main part of the verb must be moved to the end of the sentence. For example, \"Someone has stolen my car\" is \"Jemand hat mein Auto gestohlen\" (\"Someone has my car stolen\"), and \"Someone called me last night\" is \"Jemand hat mich letzte Nacht angerufen\" (\"Someone has me last night called\").\nIn writing, every noun must start with a capital letter. German is the only language that still has that rule, but Danish and English did so a long time ago.\nStandard German is an official language in Switzerland, but the Swiss dialect of German is difficult to understand for native speakers from Germany and even for Swiss who are not native to speaking German. One reason that the dialects are still so different today is that even if Switzerland adopted Standard German, mostly as a written standard, German Swiss in World War II wanted to separate themselves from the Nazis by choosing to speak dialect over the Standard German.\nSwiss German also has some differences in spelling, for example, the letter \"\u00df\", which is used only in German, is replaced by \"ss\".\nGerman numbers.\nGerman numbers are similar to their English counterparts. Like most languages, the German number system is based mainly on the first 10 numbers. They will pop up over and over throughout all the higher numbers.\nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "3347", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3347", "title": "Flexsys Cefn Druids F.C.", "text": ""}
{"id": "3349", "revid": "470168", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3349", "title": "Mississippi River", "text": "The Mississippi River is a river in the United States. It is one of the longest rivers in the world. Its largest city is Memphis, Tennessee. The name \"Mississippi\" comes from a Native American name that means \"big river.\" The source of the Mississippi is Lake Itasca in Minnesota, near the border with Canada. The Mississippi flows south through the middle of the United States. It flows through the states of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, and Mississippi. The mouth of the Mississippi is in the state of Louisiana, south of the city of New Orleans. The Mississippi flows into the Gulf of Mexico.\nAt the end of the Mississippi there is a zone in the Gulf of Mexico where very few animals can survive comfortably because of the fertilizer and other chemicals that run off of farms into the river and its tributaries. The rivers then carry them into the gulf.\nTransportation.\nThe Mississippi has been very important for transportation in the history of the United States. In the 1800s, many steamboats traveled on the Mississippi River. St. Louis, Missouri, Memphis, Tennessee, and New Orleans were important port cities.\nTributaries.\nThe Mississippi has many large tributaries, or rivers that flow into it. The watershed of the Mississippi covers much of the United States. This means that the Mississippi and its tributaries drain much of the United States.\nSome important tributaries of the Mississippi are (listed from the source to the mouth of the river):\nThe Mississippi River in books.\nA big part of the book \"Huckleberry Finn\" by Mark Twain is set on the Mississippi River. Twain also wrote a book called \"Life on the Mississippi\", which had some stories about how he used to work on a steamboat."}
{"id": "3350", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3350", "title": "Tributary", "text": "A tributary of a river is another river that flows into it. If one river flows into a second river, then the first river is a tributary of the second river. A tributary is a body of water that flows into another body of water.\nThe opposite of a tributary is a distributary. A distributary is a river that branches off from the main flow of water, for example in a river delta."}
{"id": "3351", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3351", "title": "Missouri River", "text": "The Missouri River is a river in the western United States. It is a tributary of the Mississippi River. It is longer than the Mississippi River. It is, in fact, the longest river in North America.\nGeography.\nFor most of its course, the Missouri flows across the Great Plains, one of the driest parts of North America.\nThe source of the Missouri River is in the Rocky Mountains, in the state of Montana. The Missouri flows eastward, across Montana, south of the border with Canada. It enters the state of North Dakota and then it turns south. It flows through South Dakota. Then it flows past Iowa, Nebraska, Missouri, and Kansas.\nNear the city of Kansas City, Missouri, the Missouri turns eastward into the state of Missouri. It flows eastward across the state of Missouri. It joins the Mississippi just north of the city of Saint Louis, Missouri.\nThe Missouri has many important tributaries, including the Yellowstone River, the Platte River, and the Kansas River.\nHistory.\nThe Missouri was very important for the Native Americans who lived on the Great Plains. It was also very important in the history of the United States. The Missouri was used as the route of the Lewis and Clark Expedition in 1804-1806. In the 19th century, the Missouri was very important in the North American fur trade and for transportation of army troops and supplies as well as general transportation and trade as the West was settled.\nNicknames.\nThe nickname of the Missouri is \"Big Muddy\", because it has a lot of silt."}
{"id": "3352", "revid": "138847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3352", "title": "Meaning of life", "text": "Many religions, viewpoints, and creative artists have tried to find the meaning of life, but have no sensible answer. Some people say that we will never know what the meaning of life is. Many religions claim to offer some answers. There are also sets of ideas called philosophies which try to answer this question. There are also artists who paint or create sculptures to try expressing life. There are musicians who write music and writers who write stories that try to explain life. \nMany have different opinions on what the meaning is. Some say life is a war zone where we are the soldiers fighting in that war for survival. Some think it is all about the relationships that we make in our life. Some people say that life is full of violence and hatred but some say that life is full of hope and happiness. Still, other people say that the meaning of life is to achieve the goals you set in life. According to Douglas Adams, the answer to the question is 42. The biological answer is to have children, which is to pass on your genes. Others say the meaning of life is simply to live your life to the fullest.\nSome say, however, the meaning of life is simply to give life a meaning. However, life can also be an illusion, or maybe a mere mirror of a different universe. Maybe we really don't have any control over our or the universe's actions, since we are all just imitating a different universe. We can never really know. Philosophies such as nihilism and absurdism deny that life has any meaning.\nOr maybe the true meaning of life is to live it completely how you want to, then find out the meaning of it at the end. The meaning could be unique to all of us.\nOthers, like Solomon, argue that 'life is useless'. (Ecclesiastes 1:2) "}
{"id": "3354", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3354", "title": "Drainage basin", "text": "Drainage basin is a geographic term about rivers. It is also called catchment, catchment area, catchment basin, drainage area, river basin, and water basin.\nIt is an area of land. All water that falls on that land flows into one river. It can flow directly into the river or go through tributaries (smaller rivers that flow into the bigger river) first. \nOne river can drain a large area. For example, more than half of the United States is drained by the Mississippi and its tributaries. The Amazon basin is similarly large.\nRiver basins are an open system with inputs and, outputs. Water comes in as precipitation and goes out as discharge.\nWatershed.\nThis term can have two main meanings:\nThere are also a number of figurative meanings as a metaphor."}
{"id": "3355", "revid": "7590052", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3355", "title": "Great Plains", "text": "The Great Plains is a large space of level land or prairie in the middle and western parts of North America. It is a steppe or grassland.\nThe western boundary is the Rocky Mountains. In the east, the Great Plains grassland becomes the tallgrass of the Mississippi River basin. The prairie is (in whole or part) in eleven U.S. states, and in the southern parts of three Canadian provinces.\nIn the Great Plains, summers are hot and humid, but winters are cold. Bison used to number millions, and were the main food for people there. Now the area is mainly sown with cereal crops which feed cattle and people."}
{"id": "3356", "revid": "115351", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3356", "title": "Mythology", "text": "Mythology refers variously to the collected myths of a group of people or to the study of such mythstheir body of stories which they tell to explain nature, history, and customs. It can also refer to the study of such myths.\nA myth is a story which is not true. It means it is still subject to debate. Myths may be very old, or new (for example: urban myths). There may not be records or other proof that they happened, but at least some parts of myths may be true. We know about them from older people telling them to younger people. Some myths may have started as 'true' stories but as people told and re-told them, they may have changed some parts, so they are less 'true'. They may have changed them by mistake, or to make them more interesting. All cultures have myths. Stories about the Greek and Roman gods and goddesses are myths.\nMany people once believed in legendary creatures and animals. The animals and legendary creatures may have control or has power over a part of human or natural life. For example, the Greek god Zeus had powers over lightning and storms. Whenever Zeus wanted to, he could make a storm, and he made storms to show his anger. Similarly, in Hindu mythology, thunderstorms were said to be the wrath of Indra, the chief of all gods. His most powerful weapon was the \"Vajra\", or 'thunderbolt'. It was said that no one could survive after an attack from this weapon. Another example is the Egyptian god, Atum, who was said to be the creator of everything in the world.\nContent of myths.\nAll cultures have developed their own mythology over time. Mythology includes the legends of their history, their religions, their stories of how the world was created, and their heroes. These stories have great symbolic power, and this may be a major reason why they survive as long as they do, sometimes for thousands of years.\nThe main characters in myths are usually gods, demigods, or supernatural humans, while legends generally feature humans as their main characters. Many exceptions or combinations exist, as in the \"Iliad\", \"Odyssey\", and \"Aeneid\". Myths are often endorsed by rulers and priests and closely linked to religion or spirituality. In fact, many societies group their myths, legends, and history together, considering myths to be true accounts of their remote past.\nCreation myths take place in some early primordial age when the world had not reached its present form. Other myths explain how the society's customs, institutions and taboos were established and sanctified. A separate space is created for folktales, which are not considered true by the people who tell them. As stories spread to other cultures or as faiths change, however, myths can come to be considered folktales. Sometimes myths and legends get merged. Their divine characters get recast as humans or as demihumans (such as giants, elves, and faeries).\nCreation myths describe the \"official\" belief as to how world was created. These myths differ greatly between societies, as any collection of myths clearly shows. Over the last three centuries, the power of myths over the minds of people has been challenged by the growth of science.\nHistorians' views on myths.\nAlthough myths are often considered to be stories of events that have not happened, many historians think myths are about actual events that have become connected with strong symbolic meaning, or that have been changed, or shifted in time or place, or even reversed. One way of thinking about this process is to imagine 'myths' as lying at the far end of an imaginary line. At one end of the line is 'dispassionate account', and 'legendary occurrence' or 'mythical status' is near the other end. As an event progresses toward the 'mythical' end of this line or continuum, the way people think, feel and say about the event changes. It may gain greater historical significance while the 'facts' become less important. By the time one arrives at the mythical end of the line, the story has \"taken on a life of its own\" and the facts of the original event have become almost unimportant."}
{"id": "3357", "revid": "7522876", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3357", "title": "Minnesota River", "text": "The Minnesota River is a river in the United States. It is in the northern United States, in the state of Minnesota. It is a tributary of the Mississippi River. It is about 534 km long.\nThe source of the river is a lake in western Minnesota. The lake is called Big Stone Lake. The lake is on the border between the state of Minnesota and the state of South Dakota. From its source, the Minnesota flows southeast. At Mankato, it turns northeast. It joins the Mississippi just south of the cities of Saint Paul and Minneapolis.\nThe Minnesota River was formed after the last ice age in North America."}
{"id": "3358", "revid": "369772", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3358", "title": "List of mythologies", "text": "Mythology is the collection of myths for a culture. A myth is a story or series of stories used to explain the world around you and describe what is happening, such as why weather happens. Myths usually have heroes, gods, and creatures that are bigger or more fantastic than real life, or sometimes just normal people doing amazing things. Some myths try to explain the natural world. One example is the Greek myth of Arachne. She believed that she could weave far better than anyone else, including the goddess Athena. So, Athena challenged Arachne to a weaving contest. Arachne lost, then was turned into a spider. This myth explains why spiders weave webs."}
{"id": "3359", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3359", "title": "Wisconsin River", "text": "The Wisconsin River is a river in the United States. It is a tributary of the Mississippi River. It is located in the state of Wisconsin. It is approximately 692 km long.\nThe source of the Wisconsin is in the forests of northern Wisconsin. The source is a small lake on the border between Wisconsin and Michigan. The river flows south across Wisconsin. It flows through a plain made by a glacier during the last ice age. It passes the cities of Wausau and Stevens Point.\nIn southern Wisconsin, the river meets a moraine. The moraine was made during the last ice age. The river enters a beautiful gorge, called the Wisconsin Dells. North of the city of Madison, the river turns to the west. It flows west through the hills of southwest Wisconsin. It joins the Mississippi 15 km south of the city of Prairie du Chien.\nThe river is an important source of hydroelectric power."}
{"id": "3361", "revid": "1126497", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3361", "title": "Alaska", "text": "Alaska (), officially the State of Alaska, is a state in the United States. It is in the Northwest corner of the continent of the United States West Coast. Alaska does not touch other US states. It has borders with Canada, the Arctic Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, the Bering Sea, and the Bering Strait.\nAlaska is the biggest state in the United States. It is the 3rd least populated state. It has the lowest population density of all the states. About half of the population of Alaska lives in the Anchorage metropolitan area. As of the 2011 census, 722,718 people live in Alaska.\nThe United States bought Alaska from Russia on March 30, 1867. This was called the Alaska Purchase. It cost $7.2 million. Today, that would be $120 million. The price was about $0.02 per acre ($4.74/km2). Alaska became an organized (or incorporated) territory on May 11, 1912. It became the 49th state on January 3, 1959.\nThe name \"Alaska\" comes from the Aleut word \"alaxsaq\". This means \"the mainland\" or \"the object towards which the action of the sea is directed.\" The land is also called Alyeska, which is another Aleut word that means \"the great land.\" The Russian name was \u0410\u043b\u044f\u0441\u043a\u0430.\nAlaska mainly exports seafood, primarily salmon, cod, Pollock and crab. The oil and gas industry is very important in the Alaskan economy. More than 80% of the state's revenues is from petroleum extraction.\nGeography.\nThe capital city is Juneau, but the biggest city is Anchorage. Alaska is the biggest state in the United States, but it has one of the smallest populations. It is also the least densely populated with more than half of the population residing in the Anchorage Metropolitan Area. Alaska has almost 20% of all the land in the U.S., but only about 0.2% of the people. It is not connected to any other states by American land, but it is connected to the territories of Yukon and British Columbia in Canada.\nAlaska has many glaciers, some of which are can be seen from passing cruise ships. Some are coastal, and others are not by the ocean. It is a popular tourist destination, as there is a very rich culture along with beautiful scenery. There are many wild animals in Alaska. Some of them are the brown bear, the moose, and the wolf.\nThere are some important industries in Alaska, like oil, fishing, mining, and forestry. Oil is the biggest industry in Alaska. Most of the oil is very far north in the Alaskan arctic. A very long pipeline starts at the northern coast of Alaska and runs to the southern coast. It is over long. There were many gold rushes in Alaska.\nMany active volcanoes are found in the Aleutians in Alaska. One of the world's largest tides occur in Turnagain Arm, just south of Anchorage, where the differences in the tides can be more than 35 feet (10.7 m).\nTongass National Forest, the largest national forest in the United States can be found in Southeast Alaska. The state capital Juneau, the former capital Sitka, and Ketchikan, can be found in Southeast Alaska."}
{"id": "3364", "revid": "3164", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3364", "title": "Sculpting", "text": ""}
{"id": "3365", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3365", "title": "American English spelling", "text": ""}
{"id": "3366", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3366", "title": "British English spelling", "text": ""}
{"id": "3374", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3374", "title": "BBC", "text": "The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), known by the BBC, is an organisation in the UK. It broadcasts in the United Kingdom and other countries on television, radio and the Internet. The BBC also sells its programmes to other broadcasting companies around the world.\nThe organisation is run by a group of twelve governors who have been given the job by the Queen, on the advice of government ministers. The governors appoint a Board of Management to take care of running the business of the BBC. The head of the Board of Management is called the Director General.\nBBC Charter.\nThe BBC is established under a royal charter, which allows the BBC to broadcast. In 2006, the British Government looked at the charter to see if it needed changing.\nAnother agreement, which goes with the Charter, recognises that the BBC should be independent from any other organisation. It also says what the BBC should do for the people in Britain (the public).\nFinance.\nEvery household in the UK that watches or records \"live\" programmes, (as they\u2019re being broadcast, or distributed to the public in any other way) or watches BBC Iplayer, is required, by law, to pay for a TV Licence. As the BBC gets its money from TV licences, it does not take money from companies or shareholders, so it does not have to do what they want. Also, it is not allowed to broadcast commercials in the middle of a programme, although they can show commercials in between programmes.\nThe BBC makes extra money in several ways. One way is by selling its programmes to other broadcasting companies. Another way is by selling audio tapes and CDs of its best radio programmes, and videos and DVDs of its best television programmes. Still another way is by selling books based on programmes, and magazines about science and natural history.\n\"Radio Times\".\nIn 1923, BBC Magazines started publishing a magazine which printed listings of the week's BBC radio and television programmes in the United Kingdom. The magazine was called the \"Radio Times\". In 1991, the magazine began to print listings of programmes broadcast by other providers in the United Kingdom. Today the magazine is still printed and provides online listings too. It also prints stories about programmes, the people who make them, and the people who appear in them. The \"Radio Times\" is one of the best selling magazines in the United Kingdom. In August 2011, the BBC agreed to sell the magazine to Exponent, if Britain's Office of Fair Trading approves.\nBBC Report.\nThe BBC has to publish a report every year, which tells people what it has done and how much money it has made and spent.\nIf someone has a complaint about something broadcast by the BBC, they can complain to the BBC, the BBC Trust, or directly to Ofcom, the government's regulator of broadcasting.\nLocations.\nThe headquarters of the BBC is Broadcasting House in Portland Place, London. The BBC also has other offices such as the BBC Television Centre in White City, London, BBC Radio Berkshire, as well in other cities like Cardiff, Belfast, Glasgow, Birmingham, Manchester, Bristol, Southampton and Newcastle upon Tyne. Rather than hire local reporters everywhere, the BBC's journalists work in many countries across the world. This means BBC workers are sometimes in danger, especially in war zones. Most recently Alan Johnston was kidnapped and held hostage for many months in Gaza before being safely released.\nBBC iPlayer.\nBetween October 2005 and 28 February 2006, the BBC offered a service called the BBC iPlayer on their website - bbc.co.uk. It allowed people to catch up on the last seven days of TV and radio on the BBC. Users could either watch (stream) it or download the content on their computers. The downloading options are for Microsoft Windows computers and Apple devices. The iPlayer service was released to the public on 25 December 2007. The slogan for BBC iPlayer is 'Making the Unmissable, Unmissable.'"}
{"id": "3375", "revid": "983938", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3375", "title": "Illinois River", "text": "The Illinois River is a river in the United States. It is in the state of Illinois. It is an important tributary of the Mississippi River. The length of the river is about 439 km.\nGeography.\nThe source of the river is in northeastern Illinois, near the city of Joliet. It flows west across Illinois, then southwest. It passes the city of Peoria, the largest city on the river.\nIt flows into southwestern Illinois. It joins the Mississippi River 40 km north of Saint Louis, Missouri. \nThere is separate Illinois river that runs through the northernmost edge of Oklahoma.\nThe river was used for transportation by the Native Americans. It was also used by early French trappers. It was an important route between the Mississippi River and the Great Lakes.\nIn the 19th century a canal was built that connected the river to Lake Michigan. Large ships now use this canal to go from the Great Lakes to the Mississippi River. The canal goes through the city of Chicago. It is one of the reasons that Chicago became a big city."}
{"id": "3398", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3398", "title": "Milk", "text": "Milk is a white liquid made by mammals, like cows, dogs, and humans. It is made in the mammary glands (breasts, udders, or teats) of female mammals. Because newborn babies have no teeth, they must be given milk before they can eat solid food. Milk has many nutrients to help babies grow and be healthy. It is also a rich source of calcium which is good for their bones and teeth.\nStoring milk.\nIf milk is not kept cold in a refrigerator, it will become sour after some time. When milk is warmed, it turns sour. Fermentation makes this happen. Lactic acid bacteria change the milk sugar into lactic acid. Fermentation is used when making dairy products. \nMilk is often pasteurised before humans drink it. It is made into dairy products like cream, butter, yogurt, ice cream, or cheese. Pasteurised cows' milk will turn sour if it is not kept in a refrigerator. Milk should be stored between 1\u00b0 and 4\u00b0 Celsius. If milk is treated with very high temperatures, it will last longer before spoiling. This means it does not have to be put in the refrigerator until it is opened.\nLactose.\nMilk contains a chemical called lactose. Babies make an enzyme called lactase inside their bodies. Adults make less lactase. If they do not have enough, they may not be able to digest lactose anymore. This problem is called lactose intolerance and it affects many adults. There are many medicines that help adults digest lactose. Many lactose-intolerant people drink soy milk instead of animal milk, because it does not contain lactose. Soy milk tastes similar to animal milk, but it is chemically very different and is made from soybeans.\nGoat milk.\nGoat's milk is the milk from a goat. It can be drunk, both by humans or baby goats, or cheese can be made from it. This cheese is called goat's milk cheese.\nCoconut milk.\nCoconut milk is not real milk because it comes from a plant instead of an animal. However, it looks similar to real milk because it is white. It also does not have as many nutrients as real milk. It is made by removing the white \"meat\" from a coconut, pressing or squeezing the \"meat\", then adding water. It is sometimes used in cooking, for example, in Thai curry.\nCoconut cream is a thicker version of coconut milk which contains added sugar.\nAlmond milk.\nAlmond milk is produced by grinding almonds and processing that liquid for drinking.\nNutrients.\nMilk forms an important part of a person's daily balanced diet. It contains a lot of calcium that helps bones and teeth to grow stronger. Also, milk provides the body with high quality proteins, and helps in meeting the body's requirement for vitamins. One glass of milk gives about 44% to the recommended daily vitamins intake. Some kind of milks, though, do not have good calcium. These kind of milk products include cream, cottage cheese, ricotta cheese, and cream cheese."}
{"id": "3399", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3399", "title": "Weather", "text": "Weather is the day-to-day or hour-to-hour change in the atmosphere. Weather includes wind, lightning, storms, hurricanes, tornadoes, rain, hail, snow, and lots more. Energy from the Sun affects the weather too. \nClimate tells us what kinds of weather usually happen in an area at different times of the year. \nChanges in weather can affect our mood and life. We wear different clothes and do different things in different weather conditions. We choose different foods in different seasons. \nWeather stations around the world measure different parts of weather. Ways to measure weather are wind speed, wind direction, temperature and humidity. People try to use these measurements to make weather forecasts for the future. These people are scientists that are called \"meteorologists\". They use computers to build large mathematical models to follow weather trends.\nSevere weather can hurt people and their property. It can also just be a bother. Some examples of severe weather are:\nCauses of weather.\nWeather happens because different parts of the Earth get different amounts of heat from the Sun. This makes different climates. The tropics get the most heat because the Sun shines straight down on them, while the poles get the least heat because the Sun shines on them from a low angle. Warmer air is lighter than cooler air and rises higher in the sky by convection.\nThe air always has some water mixed with it. This is called humidity. When it cools, the water can change from a gas to a liquid through condensation. Then the water can fall from the sky as rain or snow. After the air rises, it gets colder and goes back towards the ground. Because the air lost its water before, it is dry when it comes back to the ground. When two air masses of different temperatures meet, this is called a warm front or cold front. The ways that the air moves around the Earth are called atmospheric circulation."}
{"id": "3402", "revid": "11594", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3402", "title": "Opera (browser)", "text": ""}
{"id": "3403", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3403", "title": "British Columbia", "text": "British Columbia (BC) is the westernmost province in Canada. It was originally two separate colonies of Great Britain, the colony of Vancouver Island, and the colony of British Columbia. British Columbia joined the Canadian Confederation In 1871. The capital of British Columbia is Victoria, but the city with the most people is Vancouver.\nHistory.\nEarly History.\nBefore European contact, British Columbia was home to large numbers of indigenous people. These people, for the large part, still live in the province. Because BC has a large amount of resources, the native people who dwelled here lived comfortably enough. The large number of resources, in particular, led to the creation of very complex hierarchical societies in British Columbia, long before the government of the Europeans.\nOregon Dispute.\nSee Also Fort Vancouver, Oregon\nThe Oregon dispute was an important factor in determining the physical shape of British Columbia, and as the political impetus for British investment in protecting her lands in British Columbia. During the middle of the 19th century, the Democratic Party of the United States, appealing to the public attraction to the Manifest Destiny (a philosophy preaching American Supremacy and expansionism), declared that the United States had a claim over the entirety of Columbia District/Oregon Territory. This attitude was reflected even further, as 54*-40' or fight, referring to the end of Columbia District, and the start of Russian Territory of Alaska. This alarming attitude, caused many in London to fear that yet another war, in less than a century, was brewing. Ultimately, however, it was resolved, at the 49th parallel. British Columbia lost Fort Vancouver (now Vancouver, Washington), and lots of the gulf islands. To this day, the Oregon Treaty is criticized by historians, as being too lenient for the Americans.\nHudson's Bay Corporation.\nWhile British Columbia was \"technically\" a British colony, it was the private corporation, the Hudson's Bay Company that really ran the place. The first Governor of Vancouver Island (then a separate colony), actually resigned over the fact that the Queen, had no say, above the interests of the Colony. After him, the next governor of the Island, was also, coincidentally, the head of the HBC's operations in British Columbia and Vancouver Island.\nGold Rush.\nThe first major gold rush in British Columbia started in 1858, after gold was discovered, on the upper reaches of the Fraser River. The sudden onslaught of uncouth Americans led to the declaration that British Columbia shall be a crown colony, instead of the unincorporated region it was, after the Oregon spat. James Douglas was appointed the governor of the newly formed colony, as well as the Colony of Vancouver Island, and for military convenience, the Capital of British Columbia was declared Queensboro, then renamed New Westminster. As massive numbers of Americans came, fears that the Americans would try to bluster themselves another chunk of territory became more and more concrete. Thus, a contingent of Royal Engineers and Marines were deployed to New Westminster. To this day, the neighbourhood of Sapperton, is known, for its history as a site of the barracks for the Engineers, nicknamed the Sappers. The infrastructure ordered by James Douglas, to support the vast amount of capital flowing from the gold industry, caused high debt for British Columbia. By 1864, British Columbia was \u00a3200,000 in debt, plus an additional \u00a318,000, from various spats with natives, and constant policing required to maintain law and order. Its vast amount of gold was useless, while BC was in debt. British Columbia amalgamated with Vancouver Island, forming one super-colony. Vancouver Island would undertake the debt, and British Columbia's capital would be in Victoria.\nConfederation With Canada.\nBritish Columbia at the middle of the 19th century, had 3 options: Remain a colony of Britain, annex itself to the United States, or join the Dominion of Canada. The option of remaining a colony was undesirable, for Britain had long adopted a \"little Briton\" policy, under which the key to economic efficiency, and reduction of bloat, was to cut off connections to its various colonies. The option of joining with Canada was also viewed as impractical, and unlikely to occur; the closest Canadian neighbor lay more than a thousand kilometers away, to the east. For most British Colombians, annexation to the United States seemed most logical. Ultimately, however, British Columbia did confederate. The advocacy of the Confederation League, resulted in British Colombian's demanding that BC join Canada. On July 20, 1871, British Columbia joined Canada. In return, BC was absolved of its debt, which became Canada's responsibility, and Canada promised to build a railway to BC within 10 years.\nIndustry.\nBritish Columbia's industry is primarily, and has always been, resource centered. For large parts of its history, including the entire time it was a colony, BC was dominated by the big 4: Forestry, Mining, Logging, and Agriculture, which have shaped British Columbia's culture, and society.\nForestry in British Columbia.\nBritish Columbia's forestry industry has always been booming. BC had a bonanza of massive trees, thanks to its location in the Pacific Rainforest region. This provided ample opportunity for entrepreneurs to build businesses. Massive sawmills sprung up, all over British Columbia, especially in what is now Vancouver and surrounding regions. However, this required massive amounts of human capital - which was surprisingly in short supply. To overcome this, massive numbers of immigrants were invited to Vancouver, and places like so. This changed BC's demographic makeup so much, that to try to stop it, the government passed several acts, to try and limit the number of immigrants. However, the change was already underway - BC subsequently became one of the most diverse places in North America, with people calling it home, from places like Asia, Europe, and even the Pacific Islands.\nMining in British Columbia.\nBritish Columbia's large mineral resources also led to a large mining industry. For the most of the 19th century, and well into the 20th century, mining was highly profitable. For the immigrants, once again, this was another opportunity to exploit. Large numbers of immigrants, skilled from their experience mining at home, filled up the labour demands, and quickly, new towns were formed. The city of Nanaimo, for instance, was founded thanks to a large amount of coal found in its harbour. Coal especially, was the fuel of the industry, as coal was required for everything it the time, from ships, to trains, to the heater in everyone's homes.\nFishing in British Columbia.\nThanks to BC's location on the coast, fishing has been very prevalent in British Columbia. Before agriculture had developed very far in BC, and well before farming fish was even a viable option, fishing was the only reliable way to get food. The native people of BC already had a very active fishing industry, with large hauls of salmon, and other creatures sustaining them. When civilization came, the fishing industry took off, as everybody needed to eat, and there was not enough agricultural goods to go around. In fishing, once again, it was the immigrants that pulled it off. Mostly Japanese workers, and their families, came. Using their rich heritage of industrialized fishing, they were able to out compete every other fisherman, that by the turn of the century, the dockyards, canneries, and fishing fleets were filled to the brim with the Japanese. Only the forced Japanese internment in WW2 put a halt to the monopoly the Japanese had on fishing in British Columbia. Today, fishing is still a powerful force, although fettered by ordinances to prevent overfishing.\nAgriculture in British Columbia.\nThe agriculture industry in BC is, and always has been humble. However, as they say, good things come in small packages, and the agricultural goods of BC, are about as good as they come. Due to the fact that BC has only about 2% arable land, the remainder being too dry, or too cold, or too remote, or a plethora of other reasons, BC has never been able to sustain a primary food agricultural industry. Even today, BC cannot grow enough food to feed its entire population, and imports foods instead, from the eastern provinces, such as Alberta, and Saskatchewan. However, where BC does grow food, the food is scrumptious, and award-winning. The Okanagan valley, is known for its award-winning fruits, and wine-related products. However, that is not where all the food is produced. In the Fraser valley delta, large amounts of other food crops are grown, such as wheat, and berries.\nHousing in British Columbia.\nThe value of real estate in British Columbia has increased a lot in recent years. Property assessed values have increased by $1-trillion since 2007. In 2018 the value was $1.861 trillion. In 2007 it was only $808 billion.\nHealth care.\nThe provincial health insurance plan in British Columbia is called Medical Services Plan (MSP). In order to join MSP a person:\nPolitics.\nBritish Columbia's premier is John Horgan, leader of the provincial New Democratic Party, a social democratic party. The NDP governs British Columbia through a deal with the provincial Green Party, led by Andrew Weaver. The BC Liberal Party is the main opponent to the NDP, and is led by Andrew Wilkinson. Other parties are active in British Columbia, such as the Conservative Party, led by Scott Anderson, although only the NDP, BC Liberal Party, and Green Party currently have seats.\nFlags.\nThe flag of British Columbia was adopted in 1960. It is based on the provincial arms and the union jack."}
{"id": "3406", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3406", "title": "Email", "text": ""}
{"id": "3407", "revid": "7368270", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3407", "title": "20th century", "text": "The 20th century began on January 1, 1901 and ended on December 31, 2000. It was the century that saw two world wars, the Soviet Union rise and fall, the coming of the telephone, sound recording, film and television, airplanes, atomic weapons, genetics and DNA, computers and electronics in general. Science and industrialization spread; medicine became more scientific. The human population increased more during this century than any previous one.\nYears.\nNote: movie years before or after the twentieth century are in \"italics\"."}
{"id": "3422", "revid": "1117958", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3422", "title": "Brussels", "text": "Brussels (, , ) is the capital city of Belgium and the European Union. \nIn 2007, 145,917 people lived there. But the area around it, known as the Brussels-Capital Region, had 1,031,215 people (which makes it the largest city area in Belgium).\nThe people of Brussels speak mainly French and Flemish (a type of Dutch). There are lots of other languages spoken as well, because the European Union offices are there and because many thousands of immigrants from all over the world live there.\nThe city is at 50\u00b0 50 North, 04\u00b0 21 East. It has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification). \nThirty-one people were killed in a terrorist attack on 22 March 2016.\nInfluence.\nMany popular European comics came from Brussels, such as (Tintin, The Smurfs, Snorks, Lucky Luke). \nIt is also well known for a style of building known as \"Art Nouveau\".\nThe vegetables Brussels sprouts are named after the city, and Brussels is also famous for its waffles and its chocolates.\nA lot of tourists visit Brussels for \"Manneken Pis\"."}
{"id": "3423", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3423", "title": "Thuringia", "text": "Thuringia (German: \"Th\u00fcringen\") is a Bundesland of Germany. It lies in central Germany and has an area of . This means Thuringia is the sixth smallest state in Germany by area. It has 2.1 million inhabitants, so it is the fifth smallest state in Germany by population. The capital is Erfurt.\nGeography.\nThuringia borders on the German states of Lower Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Saxony, Bavaria and Hesse.\nThe most conspicuous geographical feature of Thuringia is the Thuringia Forest (Th\u00fcringer Wald). In the northwest Thuringia includes a small part of the Harz mountains. The Saale river runs through Jena.\nThe biggest mountain in Thuringia is with 982m the Gro\u00dfer Beerberg in the\nThuringia Forest."}
{"id": "3424", "revid": "1104357", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3424", "title": "Saxony", "text": "Saxony ( ; ), officially the Free State of Saxony (German: , Upper Sorbian: ), is one of 16 states of Germany. It is in the southeast of the country, north of Czech Republic. To the east of Saxony is Poland. The biggest city is Leipzig. The capital is called Dresden. It was founded in 1990.\nGeography.\nSaxony is the border of Germany to the two countries Poland and Czech Republic. In the north of Saxony is Brandenburg, another German state. Saxony's west border is to Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia and Bavaria. A big part of the border to the Czech Republic are the Ore Mountains in the south of Saxony.\nDistricts.\nSaxony is divided into 3 administrative districts (Chemnitz, Dresden and Leipzig). These are subdivided into 10 districts:\nUrban districts.\nSaxony has three urban districts which do not belong to the rural districts.\nHistory.\nThe first Free State of Saxony was founded in 1918, after the first World War. After the second World War, in 1945, the \"country of Saxony\" was founded. Later the Country was divided into 3 administrative divisions of the German Democratic Republic, and thus robbed of its sovereignty.\nIn 1990 the Free State of Saxony was officially re-founded as a part of Germany.\nPopulation development.\nThe number of people in Saxony since 1905:"}
{"id": "3425", "revid": "3", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3425", "title": "National Anthem", "text": ""}
{"id": "3427", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3427", "title": "Internet Explorer", "text": "Internet Explorer (IE); formerly known as Microsoft Internet Explorer and Windows Internet Explorer, was a series of graphical web browsers made by Microsoft. It was part of the Microsoft Windows operating system, starting in 1995. It was first released as part of the add-on package Microsoft Plus! for Windows 95, that year. Later versions were free downloads, or in service packs, and included in releases of Windows 95 and later versions of Windows.\nIE has been the most popular web browser since 1999, with up to 95% usage share during 2002/2003 with IE5 and IE6. Since its peak of popularity, its usage share has decreased to 55% due to rival web browsers, and is slowly trending downward. Microsoft spent over $100 million per year on IE in the late 1990s, with over 1000 people working on it by 1999.\nThe latest release is Internet Explorer 11. Internet Explorer was originally planned to be removed from Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 in Europe, but Microsoft later dropped the plans, and instead included a browser ballot screen with the products, allowing users to select a different web browser if they wish.\nVersions of Internet Explorer for other operating systems have also been produced, including an embedded OEM version called Internet Explorer for Windows CE (IE CE), available for WinCE based platforms and currently based on IE6; Internet Explorer for Pocket PC, later rebranded Internet Explorer Mobile, which is made for Windows Mobile and Windows CE and remains in development alongside the more advanced desktop versions; and the discontinued Internet Explorer for Mac and Internet Explorer for UNIX (Solaris and HP-UX).\nThe latest version of Windows, Windows 10, comes with a new web browser called Microsoft Edge. Internet Explorer 11 is still included, but is meant to be used for sites that do not work properly with the new rendering engine in Microsoft Edge.\nHistory.\nThe Internet Explorer project was started in the summer of 1994 by Thomas Reardon, using source code from Spyglass, Inc. Mosaic, an early commercial web browser with formal ties to the pioneering NCSA Mosaic browser. In late 1994, Microsoft licensed Spyglass Mosaic for a quarterly fee plus a percentage of Microsoft's non-Windows revenues for the software. Although bearing a name similar to NCSA Mosaic, the Spyglass Mosaic had used the NCSA Mosaic source code sparingly.\nInternet Explorer 1.\nInternet Explorer 1 made its debut on August 16, 1995. It was a reworked version of Spyglass Mosaic, which Microsoft had licensed, like many other companies initiating browser development, from Spyglass Inc. It came with Microsoft Plus! for Windows 95 and the OEM release of Windows 95. It was installed as part of the \"Internet Jumpstart Kit\" in Plus!. The Internet Explorer team began with about six people in early development. Internet Explorer 1.5 was released several months later for Windows NT and added support for basic table rendering. However, by including it for free on their OS, they did not have to pay royalties to Spyglass Inc., which resulted in a lawsuit and a multi-million USD settlement.\nInternet Explorer 2.\nInternet Explorer 2 was released for Windows 95, Windows NT 3.5, and NT 4.0 on August 24, 1996 (following a 2.0 beta in November 1995). It featured support for SSL, cookies, VRML, RSA, and Internet newsgroups. Version 2 was also the first release for Windows 3.1 and Macintosh System 7.0.1 (PPC or 68k), although the Mac version was not released until January 1996 for PPC, and April for 68k. Version 2.1 for the Mac came out in August 1996, although by this time, Windows was getting 3.0. Version 2 was included in Windows 95 OSR 1 and Microsoft's \"Internet Starter Kit for Windows 95\" in early 1996. It launched with twelve languages including English but this expanded to 24, 20, and 9 for Win 95, Win 3.1, and Mac respectively by April 1996. The 2.0i version supported double-byte character-set.\nInternet Explorer 3.\nInternet Explorer 3 was released on August 13, 1996, and went on to be much more popular than its predecessors. Internet Explorer 3 was the first major browser with CSS support, although this support was only partial. It also introduced support for ActiveX controls, Java applets, inline multimedia, and the PICS system for content metadata. Version 3 also came bundled with Internet Mail and News, NetMeeting, and an early version of the Windows Address Book, and was itself included with Windows 95 OSR 2. Version 3 proved to be the first more popular version of Internet Explorer, which brought with it increased scrutiny. In the months following its release, a number of security and privacy vulnerabilities were found by researchers and hackers. This version of Internet Explorer was the first to have the 'blue e' logo. The Internet Explorer team consisted of roughly 100 people during the development of three months. The first major IE security hole, the Princeton Word Macro Virus Loophole, was discovered on August 22, 1996 in IE3. Backwards compatibility was handled by allowing users who upgraded to IE3 to still use the last IE, because the installation converted the previous version to a separate directory.\nInternet Explorer 4.\nInternet Explorer 4, released in September 1997, deepened the level of integration between the web browser and the underlying operating system. Installing version 4 on a Windows 95 or Windows NT 4 machine and choosing \"Windows Desktop Update\" would result in the traditional Windows Explorer also being replaced by a version more akin to a web-browser interface, as well as the Windows desktop itself being web-enabled via Active Desktop. The integration with Windows, however, was subject to numerous packaging criticisms (see United States v. Microsoft). This option was no longer available with the installers for later versions of Internet Explorer but was not removed from the system if already installed. Internet Explorer 4 introduced support for Group Policy, allowing companies to configure and lock down many aspects of the browser's configuration as well as support for offline browsing. Internet Mail and News was replaced with Outlook Express, and Microsoft Chat and an improved NetMeeting were also included. This version also was included with Windows 98. New features were added that allow you to save and retrieve posts in comment forms which are still not being used today. Internet Explorer 4.5 offered new features such as easier 128-bit encryption. It also offered a dramatic stability improvement over prior versions, particularly the 68k version which was especially prone to freezing.\nInternet Explorer 5.\nInternet Explorer 5 was launched on March 18, 1999, later included with Windows 98\u00a0Second Edition and came with Office 2000. The creation of Internet Explorer 5 was another significant release that supported bi-directional text, ruby characters, XML, XSLT, and the ability to save web pages in MHTML format. IE5 was bundled with Outlook Express 5. Also, with the release of Internet Explorer 5.0, Microsoft released the first version of XMLHttpRequest, giving birth to Ajax (even though the term \"Ajax\" was not coined until years later). It was the last with a 16-bit version. Internet Explorer 5.01, a bug fix version, was released in December 1999. Windows 2000 includes this version. Internet Explorer 5.5 followed in July 2000, improving its print preview capabilities, CSS and HTML standards support, and developer APIs; this version was bundled with Windows Me. However, version 5 was the last version for Mac and UNIX. Version 5.5 was the last to have \"Compatibility Mode\", which allowed Internet Explorer 4 to be run side by side with the 5.x. The IE team consisted of over 1,000 people by 1999, with funding on the order of 100 million USD per year.\nInternet Explorer 6.\nInternet Explorer 6 was released on August 27, 2001, a few months before Windows XP. This version included DHTML enhancements, content restricted inline frames, and partial support of CSS level 1, DOM level 1, and SMIL 2.0. The MSXML engine was also updated to version 3.0. Other new features included a new version of the Internet Explorer Administration Kit (IEAK), Media bar, Windows Messenger integration, fault collection, automatic image resizing, P3P, and a new look-and-feel that was in line with the \"Luna\" visual style of Windows XP, when used in Windows XP. Internet Explorer 6.0 SP1 offered several security enhancements and coincided with the Windows XP SP1 patch release. In 2002, the Gopher protocol was disabled and support for it was dropped in Internet Explorer 7. Internet Explorer 6.0 SV1 came out August 6, 2004 for Windows XP SP2 and offered various security enhancements and new color buttons on the user interface. IE6 updated the original 'blue e' logo to a lighter blue and more 3D look. Microsoft now considers IE6 to be an obsolete product and recommends that users upgrade to IE8. Many corporate IT users have not upgraded despite this.\nInternet Explorer 7.\nInternet Explorer 7 was released on October 18, 2006. It includes bug fixes, enhancements to its support for web standards, tabbed browsing with tab preview and management, a multiple-engine search box, a web feeds reader, Internationalized Domain Name support (IDN), Extended Validation Certificate support, and anti-phishing filter. With IE7, Internet Explorer has been decoupled from the Windows Shell - unlike previous versions, the Internet Explorer ActiveX control is not hosted in the Windows Explorer process, but rather runs in a separate Internet Explorer process. It is included with Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008, and is available for Windows XP Service Pack 2 and later, and Windows Server 2003 Service Pack 1 and later. The original release of Internet Explorer 7 required the computer to pass a Windows Genuine Advantage validation check prior to installing, but on October 5, 2007, Microsoft removed this requirement. As some statistics show, by mid-2008, Internet Explorer 7 market share exceeded that of Internet Explorer 6 in a number of regions.\nInternet Explorer 8.\nInternet Explorer 8 was released on March 19, 2009. It had been in development since August 2007 at the latest. On March 5, 2008, the first public beta (Beta 1) was released to the general public. On August 27, 2008, the second public beta (Beta 2) was released. It is supported in Windows XP SP2 and SP3, Windows Server 2003 SP2, Windows Vista, Windows 7, and Windows Server 2008 on both 32-bit as well as 64-bit architectures. Internet Explorer 8 (IE8) RC1 was released on January 26, 2009. Internet Explorer 8 \"Final\" was released on March 19, 2009. Security, ease of use, and improvements in RSS, CSS, and Ajax support are Microsoft's priorities for IE8. It includes much stricter compliance with web standards, including a planned full Cascading Style Sheets 2.1 compliance for the release version. All these changes allow Internet Explorer 8 to pass the Acid2 test. However, to prevent compatibility issues, IE8 also includes the IE7 rendering behavior. Sites that expect IE7 quirks can disable IE8's breaking changes by including a meta element in the HEAD section of the HTML document. IE8 also includes numerous improvements to JavaScript support as well as performance improvements, although it still does not pass the Acid3 test, with version 8.0 scoring 20/100. It includes support for \"Accelerators\" - which allow supported web applications to be invoked without explicitly navigating to them - and \"WebSlices\" - which allows portions of page to be subscribed to and monitored from a redesigned \"Favorites Bar\". Other features include \"InPrivate\" privacy features and SmartScreen phishing filter.\nInternet Explorer 9.\nInternet Explorer 9 was released on March 14, 2011. It will have complete or nearly complete support for all CSS 3 selectors, border-radius CSS 3 property, faster JavaScript, embedded ICC v2 or v4 color profiles, and hardware accelerated rendering using Direct2D and DirectWrite. Microsoft has confirmed that Web Open Font Format (WOFF) will also be supported. WOFF is \"a strong favorite\" for standardization by the Web Fonts Working Group of W3C.\nIE9 is supposed to fix many issues with Internet Explorer, including support of the CSS3 standard border-radius property, which means that people using IE9 will be able to see rounded corners, the same way people using Firefox can.\nMicrosoft has continued to downplay the importance of passing the Acid3 test,\nbut speculation that IE9 would support the SVG W3C recommendation was ignited when Microsoft announced they had joined the SVG Working Group.\nAt MIX 10, the first IE9 Platform Preview was released, which featured support for CSS3 and SVG, a new JScript engine called Chakra, and a score of 55/100 on the Acid3 test, up from 20/100 for IE8. On May 5, 2010, the second IE9 Platform Preview was released, which featured a score of 68/100 on the Acid3 test and faster performance on the WebKit SunSpider JavaScript benchmark than the first IE9 Platform Preview. On June 23, 2010, the third IE9 Platform Preview was released, which scores 83/100 on the Acid3 test and introduced support for \"&lt;audio&gt;\", \"&lt;video&gt;\", and \"&lt;canvas&gt;\" elements and WOFF. On August 4, 2010, the fourth IE9 Platform Preview was released, which features a score of 95/100 on the Acid3 test and a faster JScript engine than the third IE9 Platform Preview. The final build of IE9 is expected to be released in 2011. Support for the HTML5 video and audio tags was also promised.\nSome industry experts predict that Microsoft will release IE9 as a major out-of-band version that is not tied to any particular version of Windows.\nAccording to the Internet Explorer 9 Test Drive page, the system requirements for IE9 are Windows Vista SP2 (with Platform Upgrade and IE8) or Windows 7.\nOn August 12, 2010, Microsoft announced that the IE9 Public Beta would launch on September 15, 2010 at a special event in San Francisco linked to the idea of 'beauty of the web.' It was also confirmed that the browser would only function with Windows Vista and Windows 7. On September 15, 2010, Microsoft launched the IE9 Public Beta.\nInternet Explorer 10.\nInternet Explorer 10 does not work with Windows Vista, but only for Windows 7 and a future release of the Windows operating system.\nInternet Explorer 10 was released together with Windows 8 in 2012. Users of Windows 7 can download this version from February 2013.\nInternet Explorer 11.\nInternet Explorer 11 was released in October 2013. It is the final Internet Explorer.\nFeatures.\nInternet Explorer has been designed to view a broad range of web pages and to provide certain features within the operating system, including Microsoft Update. During the heyday of the browser wars, Internet Explorer superseded Netscape only when it caught up technologically to support the progressive features of the time.\nInternet Explorer, using the Trident layout engine:\nInternet Explorer uses DOCTYPE sniffing to choose between standards mode and a \"quirks mode\" in which it deliberately mimicks nonstandard behaviors of old versions of MSIE for HTML and CSS rendering on screen (Internet Explorer always uses standards mode for printing). It also provides its own dialect of ECMAScript called JScript.\nInternet Explorer has been subjected to criticism by W3C over its limited support for SVG promoted by W3C.\nInternet Explorer has introduced an array of proprietary extensions to many of the standards, including HTML, CSS, and the DOM. This has resulted in a number of web pages that appear broken in standards-compliant web browsers and has introduced the need for a \"quirks mode\" to allow for rendering improper elements meant for Internet Explorer in these other browsers.\nInternet Explorer has introduced a number of extensions to JScript which have been adopted by other browsers. These include the innerHTML property, which returns the HTML string within an element; the XMLHttpRequest object, which allows the sending of HTTP request and receiving of HTTP response; and the designMode attribute of the contentDocument object, which enables rich text editing of HTML documents. Some of these functionalities were not possible until the introduction of the W3C DOM methods. Its Ruby character extension to HTML is also accepted as a module in W3C XHTML 1.1, though it is not found in all versions of W3C HTML.\nMicrosoft submitted several other features of IE for consideration by the W3C for standardization. These include the 'behavior' CSS property, which connects the HTML elements with JScript behaviors (known as HTML Components, HTC); HTML+TIME profile, which adds timing and media synchronization support to HTML documents (similar to the W3C XHTML+SMIL); and the VML vector graphics file format. However, all were rejected, at least in their original forms. VML was, however, subsequently combined with PGML (proposed by Adobe and Sun), resulting in the W3C-approved SVG format, currently one of the few vector image formats being used on the web, and which IE is now virtually unique in not supporting.\nOther non-standard behaviors include: support for vertical text, but in a syntax different from W3C CSS3 candidate recommendation; Support for a variety of image effects and page transitions, which are not found in W3C CSS; Support for obfuscated script code, in particular codice_2. Support for embedding EOT fonts in web pages.\nThe favicon (short for \"favorites icon\") introduced by Internet Explorer is now also supported and extended in other browsers. It allows web pages to specify a 16-by-16 pixel image for use in bookmarks. In IE, support was, and still is, provided only for the native Windows ICO format; in other browsers it has now been extended to other types of images such as PNG and GIF.\nInternet Explorer makes use of the accessibility framework provided in Windows. Internet Explorer is also a user interface for FTP, with operations similar to that of Windows Explorer. Pop-up blocking and tabbed browsing were added respectively in Internet Explorer 6 and Internet Explorer 7. Tabbed browsing can also be added to older versions by installing MSN Search Toolbar or Yahoo Toolbar.\nInternet Explorer caches visited content in the Temporary Internet Files folder to allow quicker access (or offline access) to previously visited pages. The content is indexed in a database file, known as Index.dat. Multiple Index.dat files exist which index different content - visited content, web feeds, visited URLs, cookies, etc.\nPrior to IE7, clearing the cache used to clear the index but the files themselves were not reliably removed, posing a potential security and privacy risk. In IE7 and later, when the cache is cleared, the cache files are more reliably removed, and the index.dat file is overwritten with null bytes.\nInternet Explorer is fully configurable using Group Policy. Administrators of Windows Server domains can apply and enforce a variety of settings that affect the user interface (such as disabling menu items and individual configuration options), as well as underlying security features such as downloading of files, zone configuration, per-site settings, ActiveX control behavior and others. Policy settings can be configured for each user and for each machine. Internet Explorer also supports Integrated Windows Authentication.\nArchitecture.\nInternet Explorer uses a componentized architecture built on the Component Object Model (COM) technology. It consists of several major components, each of which is contained in a separate Dynamic-link library (DLL) and exposes a set of COM programming interfaces hosted by the Internet Explorer main executable, codice_3:\nInternet Explorer does not include any native scripting functionality. Rather, MSHTML.dll exposes an API that permit a programmer to develop a scripting environment to be plugged-in and to access the DOM tree. Internet Explorer 8 includes the bindings for the Active Scripting engine, which is a part of Microsoft Windows and allows any language implemented as an Active Scripting module to be used for client-side scripting. By default, only the JScript and VBScript modules are provided; third party implementations like ScreamingMonkey (for ECMAScript 4 support) can also be used. Microsoft also makes available the Microsoft Silverlight runtime that allows CLI languages, including DLR-based dynamic languages like IronPython and IronRuby, to be used for client-side scripting.\nInternet Explorer 8 introduces some major architectural changes, called \"Loosely Coupled IE\" (LCIE). LCIE separates the main window process (frame process) from the processes hosting the different web applications in different tabs (tab processes). A frame process can create multiple tab processes, each of which can be of a different integrity level; each tab process can host multiple web sites. The processes use asynchronous Inter-Process Communication to synchronize themselves. Generally, there will be a single frame process for all web sites. In Windows Vista with Protected Mode turned on, however, opening privileged content (such as local HTML pages) will create a new tab process as it will not be constrained by Protected Mode.\nExtensibility.\nInternet Explorer exposes a set of Component Object Model (COM) interfaces that allow other components to extend the functionality of the browser. Extensibility is divided into two types: Browser extensibility and Content extensibility. The browser extensibility interfaces can be used to plug in components to add context menu entries, toolbars, menu items or Browser Helper Objects (BHO). BHOs are used to extend the feature set of the browser, whereas the other extensibility options are used to expose the feature in the UI. Content extensibility interfaces are used by different content-type handlers to add support for non-native content formats. BHOs not only have unrestricted access to the Internet Explorer DOM and event model, they also can access the filesystem, registry and other OS components. Content extensibility can be either in terms of \"Active Documents\" (\"Doc Objects\") (e.g., SVG or MathML) or \"ActiveX controls\". ActiveX controls are used for content handlers that render content embedded within an HTML page (e.g., Adobe Flash or Microsoft Silverlight). Doc objects are used when the content type will not be embedded in HTML (e.g., Microsoft Word, PDF or XPS). In fact, the Trident rendering engine is itself exposed as a Doc object, so HTML in itself is treated as an Active Document.\nInternet Explorer add-on components run with the same privileges as the browser itself, unlike client-side scripts that have a very limited set of privileges. Add-ons can be installed either locally, or directly by a web site. Since the add-ons have a more privileged access to the system, malicious add-ons can and have been used to compromise the security of the system. Internet Explorer 6 Service Pack 2 onwards provide various safeguards against this, including an Add-on Manager for controlling ActiveX controls and Browser Helper Objects and a \"No Add-Ons\" mode of operation as well as greater restrictions on sites installing add-ons.\nInternet Explorer itself can be hosted by other applications via a set of COM interfaces. This can be used to embed the browser functionality inside the application. Also, the hosting application can choose to host only the MSHTML.dll rendering engine, rather than the entire browser.\nSecurity.\nInternet Explorer uses a zone-based security framework that groups sites based on certain conditions, including whether it is an Internet- or intranet-based site as well as a user-editable whitelist. Security restrictions are applied per zone; all the sites in a zone are subject to the restrictions.\nInternet Explorer 6 SP2 onwards uses the \"Attachment Execution Service\" of Microsoft Windows to mark executable files downloaded from the Internet as being potentially unsafe. Accessing files marked as such will prompt the user to make an explicit trust decision to execute the file, as executables originating from the Internet can be potentially unsafe. This helps in preventing accidental installation of malware.\nInternet Explorer 7 introduced the phishing filter, that restricts access to phishing sites unless the user overrides the decision. With version 8, it also blocks access to sites known to host malware. Downloads are also checked to see if they are known to be malware-infected.\nIn Windows Vista, Internet Explorer by default runs in what is called \"Protected Mode\", where the privileges of the browser itself are severely restricted - it cannot make any system-wide changes. One can optionally turn this mode off but this is not recommended. This also effectively restricts the privileges of any add-ons. As a result, even if the browser or any add-on is compromised, the damage the security breach can cause is limited.\nPatches and updates to the browser are released periodically and made available through the Windows Update service, as well as through Automatic Updates. Although security patches continue to be released for a range of platforms, most feature additions and security infrastructure improvements are only made available on operating systems which are in Microsoft's mainstream support phase.\nOn December 16, 2008, Trend Micro recommended users switch to rival browsers until an emergency IE patch was released to fix a potential security risk which \"could allow outside users to take control of a person's computer and steal their passwords\". Microsoft representatives countered this recommendation, claiming that \"0.02% of internet sites\" were affected by the flaw.\nOn December 17, 2008, a fix to the security problem above became available, with the release of the Security Update for Internet Explorer KB960714, which is available from Microsoft Windows Update's webpage. Microsoft has said that this update fixes the security risk found by Trend Micro the previous day.\nSecurity vulnerabilities.\nInternet Explorer has been subjected to many security vulnerabilities and concerns: Much of the spyware, adware, and computer viruses across the Internet are made possible by exploitable bugs and flaws in the security architecture of Internet Explorer, sometimes requiring nothing more than viewing of a malicious web page in order to install themselves. This is known as a \"drive-by install\". There are also attempts to trick the user into installing malicious software by misrepresenting the software's true purpose in the description section of an ActiveX security alert.\nA number of security flaws affecting IE originated not in the browser itself, but ActiveX-based add-ons used by it. Because the add-ons have the same privilege as IE, the flaws can be as critical as browser flaws. This has led to the ActiveX-based architecture being criticized for being fault-prone. By 2005, some experts maintained that the dangers of ActiveX have been overstated and there were safeguards in place. In 2006, new techniques using automated testing found more than a hundred vulnerabilities in standard Microsoft ActiveX components. Security features introduced in then recently released Internet Explorer 7 mitigated some of these vulnerabilities.\nInternet Explorer in 2008 had a number of published security vulnerabilities. According to research done by security research firm Secunia, Microsoft did not respond as quickly as its competitors in fixing security holes and making patches available. The firm also reported 366 vulnerabilities in ActiveX controls, an increase from the prior year.\nAccording to the latest information, Secunia reports that IE6 has 24 known unpatched vulnerabilities, IE7 has 11, and IE8 has 4. The most severe unpatched Secunia advisories affecting Microsoft Internet Explorer 6.x, 7.x, and 8.x with all vendor patches applied, are all rated Extremely critical. The oldest known unpatched vulnerabilities for IE6, IE7, and IE8 date from November 7, 2003, June 6, 2006, and February 26, 2007 respectively.\nAccording to the latest information, security research firm SecurityFocus reports that IE6 has 396 known unpatched vulnerabilities, IE7 has 22, and IE8 has 25. The oldest known unpatched vulnerabilities for IE6, IE7, and IE8 date from November 20, 2000, May 17, 2007, and April 11, 2009 respectively.\nVulnerability exploited in attacks on U.S. firms.\nIn an advisory on January 14, 2010, Microsoft said that attackers targeting Google and other U.S. companies used software that exploits a security hole, which had already been patched, in Internet Explorer. The vulnerability affected Internet Explorer 6, IE7, and IE8 on Windows 7, Vista, Windows XP, Server 2003, and Server 2008 R2, as well as IE 6 Service Pack 1 on Windows 2000 Service Pack 4.\nThe German government warned users against using Internet Explorer and recommended switching to an alternative web browser, due to the major security hole described above that was exploited in Internet Explorer. The Australian and French Government issued a similar warning a few days later. The first browser they recommended was Mozilla Firefox, followed by Google Chrome.\nMarket adoption and usage share.\nThe adoption rate of Internet Explorer seems to be closely related to that of Microsoft Windows, as it is the default web browser that comes with Windows. Since the integration of Internet Explorer 2.0 with Windows 95 OSR 1 in 1996, and especially after version 4.0's release, the adoption was greatly accelerated: from below 20% in 1996 to about 40% in 1998 and over 80% in 2000.\nA CNN article noted at the release of Internet Explorer 4: \"Microsoft's Internet Explorer has made inroads and various estimates put its share of the browser market 30 to 35 percent from about 10 percent a year ago.\" By 2002, Internet Explorer had almost completely superseded its main rival Netscape and dominated the market with up to 95 percent market share.\nAfter having fought and won the browser wars of the late 1990s, Internet Explorer gained almost total dominance of the browser market. Having attained a peak of about 95% during 2002 and 2003, its market share has since declined at a slow but steady pace. This is mainly due to the adoption of Mozilla Firefox, which statistics indicate is currently the most significant competition. Nevertheless, Internet Explorer remains the dominant web browser, with a global usage share of around 60% (though measurements vary). Usage is higher in Asia and lower in Europe.\nFirefox 1.0 had surpassed Internet Explorer 5 in early 2005 with Firefox 1.0 at roughly 8 percent market share.\nAn article notes at the release of Internet Explorer 7 in October 2006 that \"IE6 had the lion's share of the browser market with 77.22%. Internet Explorer 7 had climbed to 3.18%, while Firefox 2.0 was at 0.69%.\"\nInternet Explorer 7 was released at the same time as Firefox 2.0, and overtook Firefox 1.x by November 2006, at roughly 9% market share. Firefox 2.0 had overtaken 1.x by January 2007, but IE7 did not surpass IE6 until December 2007. By January 2008, their respective version market share stood at 43% IE7, 32% IE6, 16% FF2, 4% Safari 3 and both FF1.x and IE5 versions at less than half a percent.\nApproximate usage over time based on various usage share counters averaged for the year overall, or for the fourth quarter, or for the last month in the year depending on availability of reference.\nMarket share history overview by year and version.\nApproximate usage over time based on various usage share counters averaged for the year overall, or for the fourth quarter, or for the last month in the year depending on availability of reference. IE was at its peak in 2003 with 94% of the worldwide internet browsers, but started falling in 2004 and since has hit a 2000s decade low in 2011 with only 49.7% of worldwide internet users.\nIndustry adoption.\nThe ActiveX extension mechanism is used by many public websites and web applications, including eBay. Similarly, Browser Helper Objects are also used by many search engine companies and third parties for creating add-ons that access their services, such as search engine toolbars. Because of the use of COM, it is possible to embed web-browsing functionality in third-party applications. Hence, there are a number of Internet Explorer shells, and a number of content-centric applications like RealPlayer also use Internet Explorer's web browsing module for viewing web pages within the applications.\nOS compatibility.\nIE versions, over time, have had widely varying OS compatibility, ranging from being available for many platforms and several versions of Windows to only a few versions of Windows. Many versions of IE had some support for an older OS but stopped getting updates. The increased growth of the Internet in the 1990s and 2000s means that current browsers with small market shares have more total users than the entire market early on. For example, 90% market share in 1997 would be roughly 60 million users, but by the start of 2007 90% market share would equate to over 900 million users. The result is that later versions of IE6 had many more users in total than all the early versions put together.\nThe release of IE7 at the end of 2006 resulted in a collapse of IE6 market share; by February 2007, market version share statistics showed IE6 at about 50% and IE7 at 29%. Regardless of the actual market share, the most compatible version (across operating systems) of IE was 5.x, which had Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X, Unix, and most Windows versions available and supported for a short period in the late 1990s (although 4.x had a more unified codebase across versions). By 2007, IE had much narrower OS support, with the latest versions supporting only Windows XP Service Pack 2 and above. Internet Explorer 5.0, 5.5, 6.0, and 7.0 (Experimental) have also been unofficially ported to the Linux operating system from the project IEs4Linux.\n&amp; Final version of Windows XP Service Pack 3 does not include IE7.\n$ No native support, but possible with third party Standalone installer of IE6 Alpha.\nSee also Internet Explorer Mobile. Non-desktop versions of IE have supported Windows CE also.\n\u0141 Internet Explorer 2.0 and 2.0.1 requires System 7.0.1 or higher. Internet Explorer 2.1 requires System 7.1 or higher.\n\u20ac Included Internet Explorer 3.01 in Mac OS 8.1; Internet Explorer 4.01 in Mac OS 8.5 and 8.5.1; Internet Explorer 4.5 from Mac OS 8.6 to 9.0.4; Internet Explorer 5 from Mac OS 9.1 to 9.2.2.\n\u00a5 Internet Explorer 5 Macintosh Edition requires Mac OS 7.6 or higher. Internet Explorer version 5.1; 5.1.4; 5.1.5; 5.1.6 and 5.1.7 requires Mac OS 8.0 or higher.\n16 16-bit version\n\"Standalone\" Internet Explorer.\nEarly versions of Internet Explorer such as 5 had a compatibility mode to run Internet Explorer 4, though this feature was dropped (also, Internet Explorer for Mac users could still use 4.5 after installing IE 5). While Microsoft claims it is impossible to keep multiple versions of Internet Explorer on the same machine, some hackers have successfully separated several versions of Internet Explorer, making them standalone applications. These are referred to as \"standalone\" IEs and have included versions 3 through 7.\nMicrosoft has discontinued standalone installers for Internet Explorer to the general public. However, there are unofficial procedures for downloading the complete install package. Internet Explorer standalone uses a feature introduced in Windows 2000 called DLL redirection to force it to load older DLLs than the ones installed on the system.\nIt is also possible to install Internet Explorer via Wine.\nAfter Internet Explorer 7 is installed, an Internet Explorer 6 executable is still available in C:\\WINDOWS\\ie7, hidden by default. Launching this executable provides the user with the older IE6 interface, however web pages are rendered using the IE7 engine. The IE6 engine can be re-enabled by placing a file named \"iexplore.exe.local\" into the IE7 folder.\nAs an alternative to using IE standalone, Microsoft now makes available Microsoft Virtual PC images containing pre-activated copies of Windows XP with either IE 6 or IE 7 installed. Microsoft recommends this approach for web developers seeking to test their pages in the different versions of IE as the standalone versions are unsupported and may not work the same way as a properly installed copy of IE.\nRemoval.\nWhile a major upgrade of Internet Explorer can be uninstalled in a traditional way if the user has saved the original application files for installation, the matter of uninstalling the version of the browser that has shipped with an operating system remains a controversial one.\nThe idea of removing a stock install of Internet Explorer from a Windows system was proposed during the United States v. Microsoft court case. One of Microsoft's arguments, during the trial, was that removing Internet Explorer from Windows may result in system instability.\nRemoving Internet Explorer does have a number of consequences. Applications that depend on libraries installed by IE will fail to function, or have unexpected behaviors. The Windows help and support system will also not function due to the heavy reliance on HTML help files and components of IE. In versions of Windows before Vista, it is also not possible to run Microsoft's Windows Update or Microsoft Update with any other browser due to the service's implementation of an ActiveX control, which no other browser supports. In Windows Vista, Windows Update is implemented as a Control Panel applet.\nWith Windows 7, Microsoft added the ability to safely remove Internet Explorer 8 from Windows. Microsoft does not allow the dependencies to be removed through this process, but the Internet Explorer executable (iexplore.exe) is removed without harming any other Windows components."}
{"id": "3432", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3432", "title": "Ulster", "text": "Ulster is one of the four historical provinces which make up the island of Ireland. The others are Leinster, Munster and Connacht. \nThere are nine counties in Ulster. Three of them are in the Republic of Ireland:\nThe other six counties make up all of Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom:\nBecause most of Ulster is in Northern Ireland, the name \"Ulster\" is also sometimes used to mean \"Northern Ireland\", even though Northern Ireland is only part of Ulster. This is called \"totum pro parte\" in Latin which means \"the whole for a part\"."}
{"id": "3433", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3433", "title": "List of mathematicians", "text": "This is a list of famous mathematicians."}
{"id": "3434", "revid": "4837285", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3434", "title": "Mancala", "text": "Mancala is a group of games played in Africa, the Middle East, and central Asia. People play the games by moving seeds on a board with pits carved in it."}
{"id": "3436", "revid": "7638094", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3436", "title": "Coden, Alabama", "text": "Coden is a small fishing village near Bayou la Batre, Alabama, USA. It is about 20 miles southwest of Mobile, near the Alabama/Mississippi border. The name of the town comes from \"Coq d'Inde\", which is French for \"Turkey\".\nAround 1900, the area was known as a resort, which is a place people go to on their vacations. The Rolston Hotel brought visitors from all over the region. When it was destroyed by a fire in 1927 from a faulty fireplace only after it had survived 2 hurricanes, the community fell on hard times. The Rolston Hotel property now belongs to the City Of Bayou La Batre and is a park that is attracting people from other areas who want cool ocean breezes and peace that originally brought visitors. It is nice because it has the gentle sound of the water of Portersville Bay, fishing, and relaxation. Fresh seafood can be found on Shell Belt Road from fishing boats returning to Bayou Coden. Coden is on the southern shore of the mainland, across the Mississippi Sound from Dauphin Island and is one stop along Alabama's Coastal Birding Trail.\nHistory Revisited at Portersville Bay \nJanuary 25, 2012\nOnce upon a time, the shoreline of Coden featured a resort area known as the \u201cConey Island of the South.\u201d Tourists from all over the nation would come by train to visit the three-story Rolston Hotel. Two-hundred pound tarpons were pulled out of the surrounding bay waters. Jefferson Davis and Booker T. Washington walked the grounds. \nThe Mobile County Commission will mark this historic site, once known as Portersville, at a ceremony set for 10 a.m. Thursday, January 26 at Rolston Park located at Coden Belt Road, west of Hemley Road. The ceremony will include the unveiling of an historical marker citing the larger history of the site. \nThe event will be part of an ongoing program by the Mobile County Bicentennial Commission to mark similar spots of historical significance throughout the county during the year. \n\u201cWe are one of the oldest communities in the country and it gives us a lot of history to draw from,\u201d said Mobile County Commissioner Mike Dean, who recommended the marker at Rolston Park. \u201cThe history of this community is part of our heritage and we need to remember.\u201d \nThe Mobile County Bicentennial Commission- a volunteer-driven, non-profit group that is planning the year-long county celebration - will be highlighting communities and unincorporated areas that once had a prominent role in the development of the area, but are less well-known today as cities and towns developed around them. A new historical calendar also will be presented at the Rolston Park event that features rarely-seen photos of the earliest days of the community. \n\u201cWe are excited that our Bicentennial will bring to life the many threads of history that came together in this area,\u201d said Mobile County Commission president Connie Hudson. \n\u201cThe celebration gives us a chance to rediscover all the people and places that brought us to this time in our history,\u201d said Mobile County Commissioner Merceria Ludgood. \nThe Mobile County Bicentennial Commission will be celebrating the history of Mobile County throughout the year, leading to a birthday extravaganza on the date of the county\u2019s 200 year birthday on December 18"}
{"id": "3437", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3437", "title": "Platypus", "text": "The duck-billed platypus (\"Ornithorhynchus anatinus\") is a small mammal. It is one of only two monotremes to survive today. It lives in eastern Australia. The plural of platypus is just 'platypus'.\nThe platypus lives in rivers and river banks. It is one of only two families of mammals which lay eggs. The other is the Echidna, which has four species. The platypus was first described in detail in the early 19th century, but it took a while before biologists in England believed what they were reading.\nThese mammals are called monotremes because they have a common rear opening known as the cloaca. Through this opening faeces and urine are voided (put out), and sexual activity takes place. This is a primitive ('basal') feature of tetrapods, which monotremes, birds and reptiles have today. The more 'advanced' ('derived') mammals have the system where the rear has two openings.\nWhat sort of animal is it?\nThe platypus looks similar to a beaver with a brown, furry body and wide, flat tail. Unlike a beaver, it has no feet (no toes), which are good for swimming. When the platypus moves on land, it walks on its knuckles so the webs on its feet will not get in the way. Its nose is large and rubbery. The platypus is sometimes called \"duck billed platypus\" because of this nose. It is similar to a duck's bill (mouth). Platypus can be big or small. The larger platypus live in Tasmania while the smaller ones live in Queensland. Adults can be less than or up to . Its body can be from to long. Its tail can be from to long. Males are about one-third (1/3) larger than females. \nThe male platypus has a sharp spine on his two back ankles called \"spurs\" which contain a venom. It will not kill humans, but the poison has been known to kill small animals, such as dogs, and cause pain lasting as long as four months. The amount of poison increases during the breeding season.\nWhat they eat.\nThe platypus sleeps during the day, and moves mostly at night. It is a very good swimmer and spends much of its time in the water. The toes on its feet are joined. When it swims, it pushes itself along by moving the front two feet. The tail and back feet help it to turn left or right, but does not make it faster.\nThe platypus eats other animals. It eats worms, insect larvae, shrimps and yabbies, which are a kind of freshwater crayfish. It digs these animals out of the bottom of the river with its beak, or catches them while swimming. Its nose can sense many things that other noses cannot. The platypus can sense electricity from other animals. It keeps its eyes shut when swimming, using only its other senses, such as hearing, touch and changes in the electrical field. The platypus can also hunt without using its eyes. These are adaptations to life in rivers where the water is opaque with sediment. \nReproduction.\nWhen on land, the platypus lives in burrows on the river banks. These holes are between and long. It makes these holes in the river bank a little above the water. It likes them hidden under roots. When a female platypus is pregnant, the female makes much larger holes, up to long. She blocks the tunnel with earth at several places. At the end of the tunnel, she builds a nest out of reeds for her eggs. \nThe platypus lays eggs in its nest. When the babies come out of the eggs after about ten days, they hold on to the mother. The mother makes milk for the new babies. The platypus does not have nipples, but milk comes through small openings in the skin. The young platypus drinks the milk from the mother's skin while she lies on her back. At six weeks the babies have fur and are able to leave the burrow for short trips. After four months they no longer need their mother's milk.\nThe long period as dependent young, the provision of milk, and the way the young learn through play, are all advanced features. The monotremes share them with all other mammals. The monotremes are a mixture of primitive and advanced traits, a situation known as mosaic evolution.\nWhere they live.\nThe platypus lives in small streams and rivers over a large area of eastern Australia. The map above shows this with dark purple. It has been seen in alpine lakes in Tasmania in the south, and north in Queensland as far as the Cape York Peninsula in tropical rain forest rivers. \nIn the past, platypus lived in South Australia but they no longer do so. There are platypus on Kangaroo Island, but these were brought there in an attempt to save animals people thought might become extinct. There are very few if any platypus left in most the Murray-Darling Basin. The water there is no good because people used it to grow plants, and cleared the trees from the land. It is strange that the platypus does not live in some healthy rivers. It does live in some less healthy coastal rivers, for example the Maribyrnong River in Victoria. \nPlatypus are difficult to see in the wild. They dislike areas with people, spend most of their time underground or under water, and sleep during the day. At Eungella National Park in Queensland, there are spots on the river with viewing areas where wild platypus can usually be seen each evening.\nThe past and the future.\nThe first platypus specimen arrived in England in 1799 in the form of a skin of a dead platypus, so biologists could study it. At first, the scientists thought the skin was a joke, because they thought no animal could look so strange. They thought an Asian had made it from pieces of different animals.\n\"National Geographic\" magazine had a story on the platypus in 1939. Many people had never heard of the platypus. The story told how hard it was to raise the babies in zoos. Even today, humans have raised only few. David Fleay at the Healesville Sanctuary in Victoria had the first successful zoo-raised platypus in 1946. He nearly did it again in 1972 at the David Fleay Wildlife Park at Burleigh Heads, Queensland, but it died at 50 days. Healesville raised another in 1998 and again in 2000. Taronga Zoo in Sydney bred twins in 2003, and had another birth in 2006.\nThe platypus will probably not die out completely in the near future. Ecologists say that it is \u201csecure but faces future threat\u201d (safe now but not in the future) or common but vulnerable (there are a lot now but they are not safe). They say this because people can make the water unsafe for the platypus."}
{"id": "3440", "revid": "1144482", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3440", "title": "Kenya", "text": "Kenya is a country in East Africa, about halfway down, near the horn of Africa. It has the Indian Ocean to its east and Lake Victoria to its west. Kenya borders the Jubaland part of Somalia (east), Ethiopia (north), South Sudan (north-west), Uganda (west), and Tanzania (south). Kenya is about the size of France, and almost as large as Texas (U.S.).\nThe capital city of Kenya is Nairobi, which is the 14th largest city in Africa (after Accra, Ghana). Some cities on the seaside are Mombasa and Malindi on the Indian Ocean, Nyeri, Nanyuki, Naivasha, and Thika in the Kenyan Highlands, and Kisumu on Lake Victoria.\nThe first humans may have lived near the lakes of Kenya along the Great Rift Valley, which cuts Kenya from north to south.\nKenya's coast is tropical and gets very hot. Inland, it is drier and cooler where the mountains rise up. The highest mountain in Kenya is Mt. Kenya, at . Mount Kilimanjaro crosses over the south border, with Tanzania, but the highest part of Kilimanjaro is in Tanzania.\nKenya is home to many different indigenous peoples with their own cultures, languages, and histories. There are at least 44 living languages and 1 extinct language that is not spoken any more. English and Swahili are the official languages spoken in Kenya. Because of colonialism school-going Kenyans are required to learn English, and it is used in schools and universities.\nKenya was colonized by the British, who began taking land from indigenous peoples to build ranches. They also discriminated against Kenyans in their own land. Kenyans who were against this formed a group called the Kenya Land and Freedom Army, or Mau Mau that fought a war against Britain for independence. The British committed war crimes to stop the Mau Mau, but on December 12, 1963 they agreed to give Kenya independence.\nFor many years after independence, a single party, the Kenya African National Union (KANU), ruled the country. General elections were held every 5 years. However, all candidates for election to office had to belong to the ruling party, KANU. The party used the police to harass and torture socialists and communists in Kenya, and worked closely with Britain and the United States to keep them out of politics.\nUhuru Kenyatta is currently the president of Kenya. He is the first one to belong to a party other than KANU.\nEducation.\nAll Kenyans of school-going age are required to attend Primary School. However, school fees and required uniforms often keep students away from school. The Kenyan school system consists of 8 years of primary school, standard 1 through 8, 4 years of high school (Form 1 to 4) and 4 years of university but plans are underway of changing the system to 2 years in pre-school, 6 years in primary school,3 years in junior high school,3 years in senior high school and 3 years in university (2-6-6-3) in 2018. At the end of primary school, all students sit for a standardized exam called Kenya Certificate of Primary Education (KCPE). The grades attained in this exam determine which high school the student will attend. In Form 4 (this is the last year in high school), students sit for another exam called Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education (KCSE). The highest achieving students are granted admission into the 5 national universities (Nairobi, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, Kenyatta University, Egerton University and Moi University). Tertiary colleges, like Globovillee college, also feed the diploma graduates to universities.\nLand and animals.\nKenya is a country of grassland, but it is not rich, but it is productive land especially in the highlands. This is a very dry grassland with poor soil. Kenya also has very few mineral resources but their main mineral is soda ash. Three-fourths of the country is covered with plains. They are low in altitude along the coast, but get higher further inland, making a large plateau. The part east of Lake Turkana is the only true desert, but the rest can be very close to desert.\nSavannas usually get between 4 and 16\u00a0inches (100 to 400\u00a0mm) of rain in a year. These lands, however, are called savanna because of the type of plants that live there and how they get their rain. Savannas have a wet and dry season. During the wet season it can rain hard for long periods of time then not rain at all in the dry season. Savannas that have more rain often have many trees spaced out across their plains. These trees have deep roots or store water, like desert plants do, to live through the long, dry seasons without rain. Even drier savannas will have only grass, and that too only in a few clumps. The dry land is very bad for crops, but it is a wonderful place for all kinds of wild animals to gather and stay. That is why Kenya has a lot of parks where the animals are kept, and protected from all the hunters. People/tourists come from all over the world to go on photo safaris in Kenya's special wildlife parks. The people come to Kenya on safari to see animals such as the rhinoceros, giraffe, wildebeest, elephant, cheetah, antelope, and lion. These animals live on the savanna grasslands.\nThe wild herbivores move as they eat, and they never stay in one spot because there is not enough grass for all of them. People also usually raise cattle on the savanna. These animals are kept in one place and often eat up all the grass there.\nGovernment.\nSince the independence of Kenya in 1963, Kenya had usually had a one-party government. In 1991, a section of the constitution was scrapped, that automatically made it a multi-party state. It is a member of the British Commonwealth. The people are, like the Congo, divided into many tribes that often fight. However, Kenya's government is trying to get the people to work together and has encouraged them to run businesses and factories. Kenya is a developing country, slowly growing more modern.\nProvinces.\nIn 2012, Kenya was divided into 47 counties. The head of each county is a governor."}
{"id": "3441", "revid": "19530", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3441", "title": "Swahili language", "text": "The Swahili language is a language widely spoken in East Africa. In the language, its name is \"\". It is a Bantu language.\nSwahili is spoken in a wide area from southern Somalia to northern Mozambique and in all of Kenya, Tanzania and Burundi. Congo has five million first-language speakers and fifty million second-language speakers. Swahili has become a language with which people communicate within East Africa and the surrounding areas.\nSwahili language to be spoken by the Swahili people, who live on the coast of East Africa and on the islands near the coast, including Zanzibar, which is now a part of Tanzania. Swahili is an official language in Tanzania and Kenya. It has been influenced by many other languages like Arabic ."}
{"id": "3445", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3445", "title": "Long jump", "text": "The long jump is a sport in athletics (track and field), where athletes compete by comparing lengths of their jumps where athletes try to jump as far as they can. For this, the athlete runs down the runway to the jumping pit which is made of soft sand If a person falls backwards when jumping, this can decrease the length of their jump.\nRules.\nLong jump is a sport in which, the athlete who jumps the longest by legal means, wins. The athlete begins running from his or her starting position and after attaining sufficient velocity, jumps, landing in a sand pit, which is fitted with distance markers. There is a foul line, in the run-up area, that the athlete has to be aware of; jumping from beyond this line results in a \u2018foul jump\u2019. Jumpers try to get as close to the foul line as legally possible before initiating their jump."}
{"id": "3447", "revid": "7891331", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3447", "title": "Elizabeth II", "text": "Elizabeth II (Elizabeth Alexandra Mary; born 21 April 1926) is the Queen of the United Kingdom, and the other Commonwealth realms.\nShe became Queen when her father, King George VI, died on 6 February 1952. Since 9 September 2015, Elizabeth II has ruled longer than any other king or queen in the history of the United Kingdom. She has also ruled longer than any other living king or queen in the world, since the death of Thailand's Bhumibol Adulyadej on 13 October 2016.\nThe countries of which she is Queen are known as Commonwealth realms. Their total population is over 129 million. Although Elizabeth II is the queen of each country separately, all are independent countries. Elizabeth II lives and spends most of her time in the United Kingdom. In all the other countries where she is queen, a person is chosen to represent her. This person may be known as the Governor General.\nElizabeth II has few political powers, and is not a ruler in the usual sense. She is Queen and interested in the running of her countries, but she does not tell the governments what to do. She has regular meetings with people from her governments, but it is they who run the countries. She performs ceremonies for the governments, gives out honours, and visits and supports many charities.\nIn 1947, the Queen married Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, who died in 2021. The Queen and Prince Philip had four children, eight grandchildren and eight great-grandchildren. She has now been our queen for over 70 years.\nEarly life.\nElizabeth was born in her grandparents' home at 17 Bruton street, Mayfair, London on 21 April 1926. Her father was Prince Albert, Duke of York, who later became George VI. His brother was the Prince of Wales. Her mother was Elizabeth, Duchess of York.\nPrincess Elizabeth was the granddaughter of King George V and Queen Mary. She was named after her mother. Her nickname was \"Lilibet\".\nPrincess Elizabeth had one sister, Princess Margaret. Margaret was born in 1930. The two young princesses were taught at home. They had a governess named Marion Crawford.\nPrincess Elizabeth was third in the line of succession to the British Throne. The first in line was her uncle, the Prince of Wales. The second in line was her father, the Duke of York. She was third in line.\nElizabeth's grandfather, King George V, died in 1936. Her uncle became King Edward VIII. He was king only for a short time. He abdicated.\nHis brother, Elizabeth's father the Duke of York, became King George VI. One day, Princess Elizabeth would be Queen.\nElizabeth was 13 years old when World War II started. London was bombed. Elizabeth and Margaret were moved to Windsor Castle. This was for their safety. People thought that they should be sent to Canada. Their mother did not approve this idea.\nPrincess Elizabeth joined the British army in 1945. She drove a truck. She was a mechanic. In 1947, she made her first official trip outside Britain. She went with her parents to South Africa. She made a speech on her 21st birthday. She said her whole life would be devoted to the service of British Commonwealth and Empire.\nMarriage and children.\nPrincess Elizabeth married Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh on 20 November 1947. The wedding was held in Westminster Abbey. The couple lived mostly at Clarence House in London. The couple has four children; Charles, Prince of Wales was born 14 November 1948. Their second child is a daughter. She is Anne, Princess Royal. She was born 15 August 1950. The Royal couple had two more sons. Prince Andrew, Duke of York was born 19 February 1960. Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex was born 10 March 1964. The princes and princess sometimes use the name Mountbatten-Windsor. This is their official last name when they need one (royal families rarely use them). Prince Philip died on 9 April 2021 at Windsor Castle, aged 99.\nSuccession.\nIn 1951, the King's health was poor. He could not go to many public events. Princess Elizabeth started to make official visits for him. The King died on 6 February 1952. Elizabeth was crowned queen on 2 June 1953. The ceremony was held in Westminster Abbey. She wore a dress that was decorated with the national flowers of the countries of the Commonwealth. Many people bought TV sets to watch the event.\nLife as Queen.\nIn 1952, Her Majesty the Queen and Prince Philip moved into Buckingham Palace in central London. This is the main official home of the monarch.\nHer early years as Queen were spent traveling to many places. In 1953, the Queen and Prince Philip began an around the world tour in the Royal Yacht, \"Britannia\". Their tour went for 6 months. She was the first reigning monarch to visit Australia, New Zealand and Fiji.\nIn October 1957, she made an official visit to the United States. She spoke to the United Nations General Assembly. She toured Canada. She became the first monarch to open the nation's Parliament. The Queen likes to go to Canada. She calls Canada her \"home away from home\".\nIn February 1961, she visited Turkey, India, Iran, Pakistan and Nepal for the first time. Since then, the Queen has made visits to most Commonwealth countries. She has also been to most European countries and many countries outside Europe.\nIn 1991, she became the first British monarch to speak to a joint session of the United States Congress. She goes to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings. She is the most widely traveled head of state in history.\nChanges to the Commonwealth.\nWhen Elizabeth became Queen on 6 February 1952, she was officially Queen of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Pakistan and Ceylon (now called Sri Lanka). These were the Commonwealth countries. She was also Queen of the Union of South Africa (which became a republic in 1961).\nThere were many more countries that she also ruled, because they belonged to the British Empire. One by one, many of the countries became independent, and as they gained independence she became Queen of many of them. Altogether, she was sovereign of 32 nations.\nSome of the countries are now republics and have a president as \"Head of State\", while some of them keep the Queen as \"Head of State\". Queen Elizabeth II is the only monarch of more than one independent nation. The old British Empire became the Commonwealth of Nations.\nIt includes both monarchies and republics. It is now called \"The Commonwealth\". The Queen is the Head of the Commonwealth. She works hard to keep peace and good communication between all the nations that are members.\nRelationships with her governments and other countries.\nEver since she became the Queen, Elizabeth has spent about three hours every day \"doing the boxes\". The \"boxes\" are two large red boxes that are brought to her from the Parliament every day. They are full of state papers sent to her from her various departments, embassies, and government offices. One of the most famous photos taken of Elizabeth as a teenager shows her with her father, the King, learning about \"the boxes\". Because she has been doing this since 1952, she knows a great deal about the government of the UK.\nWhen the Queen is in London, she meets her Prime Minister once a week, to talk about events. She also has meetings with the First Minister of Scotland and other Ministers of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and the Prime Ministers and Ministers of other countries, when she is in their country, or when they visit London.\nIn the late 1990s, there were \"referendums\" in which the people of Scotland and Wales were asked if they wanted parliaments that were separate from the parliament of the United Kingdom. This was called a \"devolution policy\". As a result, the new Scottish Parliament and the National Assembly of Wales, were set up. The Queen opened the first sessions of these two bodies.\nRecently, some people in Australia wanted a republic, with an elected or appointed president as Head of State instead of the Queen. In 1999, the people of Australia were asked in a referendum whether they wanted a republic. The decision of the people was to remain a monarchy. The Queen visited Australia the following year and said that she would continue to serve Australians as she had done for 48 years.\nElizabeth II is friends with many world leaders. Her first Prime Minister of Australia, Sir Robert Menzies called her \"My Dear\" and recited a poem that said \"I will love her till I die\". She has friendships with Mary Robinson, President of Ireland (1990-1997) and George W. Bush, who was the first American President in more than 80 years to stay at Buckingham Palace. Nelson Mandela, in a BBC documentary, called her \"my friend, Elizabeth\".\nIn May 2007, the Queen and Prince Philip made a state visit to the United States, in honour of the 400th anniversary of the Jamestown settlement.\nThe Queen as a person.\nFaith and duty.\nElizabeth II, as the Monarch of the United Kingdom, is the \"Supreme Governor\" of the Church of England and sworn protector of the Church of Scotland. She is very interested in the Church of England, but the Archbishop of Canterbury runs the church. She rarely attends the yearly meeting of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.\nThe Queen is deeply religious. In her Christmas Day television broadcast in 2000, she said:\nThe Queen regularly goes to church wherever she is: at St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle, St. Mary Magdalene Church at Sandringham House, Crathie Kirk at Balmoral Castle, and Canongate Kirk in Edinburgh, when she stays there in Holyroodhouse, her official home in Scotland.\nThe Queen often meets with leaders from other religions as well. In 1980, she became the first British Monarch to visit the Vatican, where she was welcomed by Pope John Paul II. She made another visit twenty years later on 17 October 2000. Queen Elizabeth II is Patron of \"The Council of Christians and Jews\" in the UK.\nThe Queen has shown a very strong sense of duty, ever since she was a girl. Her father, King George VI, was not meant to be king. Her uncle became king when her grandfather died. But he fell in love with an American woman who was divorced, and that wasn't allowed. So he had to give up being king very shortly after ascending. George VI didn't want to be king, because he was quite nervous and had a stammer. However, Elizabeth's grandfather said that he didn't think her uncle was very good as a king, and wanted George to reign, then Elizabeth. From the moment she realised that one day she would be Queen, she became very interested in her duties and did all she could to help her father. Her promise to serve her people all her life has always been very important to her. Some people think that now that she is old, perhaps she will retire (\"abdicate\") and let her son Prince Charles take over. People who know her well, including Prince Charles, have said that this will never happen.\nCourage.\nThe Queen has often shown courage, ever since she joined the military at 18. During a trip to Ghana in 1961, she was warned that it was dangerous to be near the President Kwame Nkrumah because people wanted to kill him. But she refused to stay away. The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Harold Macmillan, wrote that the Queen got very impatient with people if they tried to treat her like \"a film star\".\nIn 1964, when the Queen was invited to Quebec, there were fears for her safety because there was opposition to her visit. There were suggestions that the tour should be cancelled. But the Queen's secretary said that the Queen would not want to be stopped from going to Quebec because of any danger. During the Trooping the Colour in 1981, she was shot at, but she carried on. The Queen was praised for her courage and for her ability to keep her horse calm. It was later discovered that the shots were blanks. In 1982, a man called Michael Fagan broke into Buckingham Palace in the morning, and found the Queen's bedroom. He woke her up, and sat on her bed, until the guards came to take him away.\nFamily relations.\nThroughout her long reign, Queen Elizabeth II has been supported in her duties by her husband, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Prince Philip promised to help the Queen on the day of her Coronation. The Queen was also helped by her mother Queen Elizabeth, known as \"The Queen Mother\", who lived to be 101 years old, and stayed very active in her old-age. The Queen is the patron of many organisations and charities. She has many invitations and official duties. Many of the duties have been shared by other members of the Royal Family, who have also become patrons of many organisations.\nThe Queen was sad about the broken marriages and divorces of three of her children, Prince Charles, Princess Anne and Prince Andrew. Prince Charles's marriage to Lady Diana Spencer was thought to be a fairytale wedding because Diana was young and beautiful, and they seemed very happy. But soon the marriage became troubled, and after their divorce, she was killed in a car accident in 1997. On 9 April 2005, Prince Charles married Camilla Parker-Bowles, whom he had loved for many years. In the year 2002, within a few months of each other, the Queen's mother and sister, Princess Margaret, both died.\nAs the Queen is old, people worry about her health, but she is rarely sick. However, she is leaving more duties to the younger members of the Royal Family, particularly to Prince Charles, who will become King when she dies.\nWealth.\nThe Queen's wealth is private. It is difficult to estimate how much she is worth. She owns Sandringham House, Balmoral Castle, and other large properties. She does not own Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle, or the royal collection of art. These are worth millions of pounds. In 2010, \"Forbes\" magazine estimated her personal fortune at about US$450 million (\u00a3300 million).\nJubilees.\nSilver Jubilee.\nIn 1977, the Queen celebrated her Silver Jubilee. This jubilee marked the 25 anniversary of her coming to the throne. There was a royal procession in the golden State Coach. A service of thanksgiving was held at St. Paul's Cathedral. Millions of people watched on television. There were parties across the UK. Five commemorative stamps were printed in honour of the event. The Jubilee line of the London Underground opened in 1979, named after the anniversary.\nGolden Jubilee.\nIn 2002, Elizabeth II celebrated Golden Jubilee. This jubilee marked the 50th anniversary of her coming to the throne. She toured the Commonwealth countries. There was a pop concert in the gardens of Buckingham Palace. A service of thanksgiving was held at St. Paul's Cathedral.\nDiamond wedding anniversary.\nThe Queen and Prince Philip celebrated their sixtieth (diamond) wedding anniversary on 19 November 2007, with a special service at Westminster Abbey. The night before, Prince Charles gave a private dinner party at Clarence House for twenty members of the Royal Family.\nOn the following day, 20 November, the Queen and Prince Philip went on a visit to Malta, where they had stayed from 1949 to 1951 after getting married. A Royal Navy ship, which was nearby, got its sailors to line up on deck to form a big number '60' for the couple.\nDiamond Jubilee.\nIn 2012, the Queen's 60 years as monarch were marked by Diamond Jubilee celebrations, including a grand pageant of boats on the Thames and a service of thanksgiving at St Paul's Cathedral.\nSapphire Jubilee and Platinum Wedding Anniversary.\nIn 2017, the Sapphire Jubilee marked the Queen's 65 years as monarch. She was the first British monarch to have a Sapphire Jubilee. Instead of large celebrations, as usual, the Queen spent the day in \"quiet reflection\" because the day was also the anniversary of her father's death. Commemorative stamps and coins were made in honour of the Jubilee, and a portrait of the Queen wearing sapphire jewellery was reissued.\nAlso in 2017, the Queen and Prince Philip celebrated their seventieth (Platinum) wedding anniversary. They held a private celebration at Windsor Castle. Westminster Abbey, where they were married, held a three-hour bell ceremony.\nTitles and styles.\nWhen someone is talking about the Queen, she is called \"The Queen\" or \"Her Majesty\". When someone is talking to her, she is called \"Your Majesty\". After the first time, the person talking to the Queen can say \"Ma'am\". It is pronounced \"Marm\". These are the titles that she has had:\nThe Queen has several coats of arms. In the UK, they are known as the \"Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom\". Every British monarch has used these arms since the reign of Queen Victoria. The coats of arms used in Scotland and Canada are different to the arms used in England and Wales.\nElizabeth II is:"}
{"id": "3448", "revid": "7770603", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3448", "title": "Question", "text": "A question is what someone asks, usually when there is something that he or she does not know. In writing, a question mark (\"?\") comes at the end of a question. However, just because a question is asked does not mean there is an answer.\nWhy do we need to study the past\nExamples of these questions.\nPeople may give a short answer. People may give a long answer. It depends on the question.\nTypes.\nDifferent kinds of why questions need different kinds of answers. A question like \"Why did you do that?\" clearly asks for an explanation. What that explanation might be depends on context. This kind of explanation is not right or wrong: it all depends on circumstance. The question and answer may also have to do with \"who\", \"what\", \"when\" and \"where\".\nThere are types or forms of explanations, including:\nMany kinds of explanations are made up of more than one type.\nAn explanation can be valid or invalid or a combination of both. Some explanations may appear reasonable, but they turn out to be misleading or wrong."}
{"id": "3449", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3449", "title": "Boss", "text": "A boss is a person who is in charge of workers in a company or organization. Bosses can have many different job titles. Simple examples include manager, supervisor and director.\nBoss may also mean:"}
{"id": "3450", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3450", "title": "Gun", "text": "A gun (also called a firearm) is a weapon used to shoot one or more metal projectiles called bullets. Guns made of wood or bamboo are thought to have been made in China around 1000 AD. In the next few centuries they spread to other parts of Asia and to Europe where they were made of metal. Guns largely replaced catapults and bows and arrows when they became strong enough to reach out over longer distances to kill or hurt. They are of many different sizes. Some are small enough to hold in one hand. Others are large enough to sink a warship.\nIn military usage, the word \"firearm\" is used for the type of weapons that soldiers carry. Most of them are either pistols or rifles. These small arms can be carried and used by one person. They have the same basic parts: a trigger, a barrel, and a handgrip or stock. The shooter's finger pulls the trigger to fire the weapon which releases a bullet. The barrel guides the bullet which then flies to the target. The shooter's hand holds the handgrip. \nGuns can be very effective weapons. Their bullets fly faster than an arrow or spear. Their high kinetic energy makes them more lethal. They also shoot from far distances. Bullets are usually non-explosive pieces of metal.\nCartridges.\nA modern bullet is the front part of a \"round\" or cartridge. A cartridge consists of a \"bullet\", propellant and a primer. These are packaged in a metallic, paper, or plastic case which is sized exactly for the chamber of the firearm being used. When the rear of the case (containing the primer) is struck, an explosion in the back of the cartridge ignites the propellant. The controlled explosion forces the bullet out of the barrel. Cartridges have different ways of being loaded into different kinds of weapons. Cartridges can be loaded directly into a firearm into the chamber. Or, more commonly, into a clip, a magazine or other bullet container which is loaded into the firearm. Handguns known as revolvers have a cylinder with holes that the bullets are loaded into. Modern guns called pistols are handguns loaded with a magazine.\nMilitary use.\nGuns have been used by armies since about the 14th century. Long barreled guns called muskets, that could be carried and used by one person, were in use by 1350. They became an important weapon in European armies about the 1600s. \nModern militaries use the word \"gun\" for larger artillery guns that need several people, and that fire big ammunition. For example, weapons on warships and tanks are called \"guns\". They may be in a \"turret\" (a rotating base). Big guns usually fire artillery shells, which explode upon impact. \nIn almost every country firearms are the main weapons used by armies. In modern armies, every soldier has at least one firearm as standard equipment. Soldiers are trained to use firearms, and to keep them clean and ready for use.\nSporting use.\nShooting is a competitive sport involving tests of accuracy and speed. They use various types of guns such as pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns and airguns. Shooting sports are categorized by the type of firearm, targets, and distances at which the targets are shot. Target Shooting is an Olympic sport. \nSince the first humans, hunting became a way of life. It was and still is in some places, the key to survival. Mankind is distinguished from other animals by the use of tools. At least 2 million years ago man learned to hunt animals for meat. They learned to create and use spears and axes. Bows and arrows were used at least 71,000 years ago. Modern hunting still uses more primitive tools. But many subsistence hunters have adapted to use modern firearms. In modern countries hunting is still allowed but is considered a sport. Hunting can be used to control the populations of many animal species. As with many aspects of gun ownership and use, modern hunting remains controversial. Handguns are not generally used for hunting.\nLegal use.\nGuns can be used to kill other people. For that reason many countries only allow soldiers, policemen, and certain social classes to have them. In some countries, a person must have a special permit (or license) if they want to own a gun. Depending on the gun, people need to be a certain age and may need to meet other criteria to get such a permit. \nAn example of this is that in the United States federal law allows buying rifles and/or shotguns at age 18\u2014if purchased from a licensed firearms dealer. But a person must be age 21 or older to purchase a handgun\u2014from a licensed firearms dealer. However, if purchased from an unlicensed person, with few exceptions, a handgun may not be sold to anyone under age 18. There is no age restriction on who may buy a rifle or shotgun from an unlicensed person. In the United States and other countries, people can buy guns for self-defense, hunting, and shooting sports like target shooting. \nIn some countries, such as Australia, people who live on farms are allowed to keep guns, but it is not easy for a person living in the city to get a gun without good reason. In the United Kingdom, access by the general public to firearms is tightly controlled by law. However, this is less restrictive in Northern Ireland. After the Dunblane school massacre in 1996 followed by the Hungerford massacre in 1987, Britain passed the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988. It required registration for shotguns and banned semi-automatic and pump-action weapons. A further ban on all handguns in mainland Britain came a year and a half later."}
{"id": "3451", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3451", "title": "New York", "text": "New York might mean:"}
{"id": "3452", "revid": "595018", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3452", "title": "World Trade Centre", "text": ""}
{"id": "3453", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3453", "title": "Hobby", "text": "A hobby is a leisure activity that people do for fun or recreation. People do it because they like it.\nArts and crafts.\nSome people do arts and crafts. They make clothing or decorations with their hands. Some popular arts and crafts that involve textiles or fabrics include crocheting, sewing (making clothing), embroidery, knitting, and quilting.\nSome people like to do hobbies that involve making images on paper, such as scrapbooking, painting, and drawing. Some people like to make three-dimensional decorations using clay or wood, in the hobbies of pottery, sculpture, wood carving, and woodworking.\nSome other arts include movie-making, photography, and musical hobbies such as singing, playing musical instruments, and writing songs.\nGames and puzzles.\nSome people enjoy hobbies such as playing games or solving puzzles. Games include board games such as chess, card games, and newer games such as wargaming and role-playing games. Popular puzzles include jigsaw puzzles and crossword puzzles.\nReading and learning.\nSome people enjoy spending their time reading books, magazines, and newspapers, or writing stories or in a diary. Other people enjoy learning foreign languages by taking classes, or doing research, such as genealogy.\nIn the 2000s, many people have Internet-based hobbies, such as editing Wikipedia, writing their own blogs, or having online discussions in Newsgroups or online forums.\nSome people enjoy computer activities, such as computer programming, learning about open source software, or playing computer games. Some people enjoy learning about electronics such as doing amateur radio broadcasts or building robots.\nHobbies in the home.\nSome people enjoy working on their home and learning how to repair their home by themselves, without hiring repair people or plumbers. Some people enjoy learning how to repair motor vehicles, such as antique cars. Some people even build and repair sailboats in their backyard.\nMany people have hobbies that they do in the kitchen, such as cooking for their guests and family, and making their own beer. Many people also have hobbies in their home that involve animals, such as keeping a pet animal, such as a dog, a cat, or tropical fish. Some people even learn about dog breeding.\nCollecting.\nCollecting is a popular hobby in North America and in Europe. People enjoy finding interesting examples of different items and learning about them. Some of the well-known types of collecting include stamp collecting, coin collecting, video game collecting, trading cards such as baseball cards, and Pok\u00e9mon cards. People also collect toys, books, comic books, and old records. Some people collect antiques and artwork, but these hobbies are more rare, because antiques and artwork are usually expensive.\nA type of hobby that is related to collecting is model building. People who do model-building as a hobby collect small models which they build, paint, and then display. Some common types of model-building hobbies include model airplanes, model rockets, model ships, model cars, and model railways.\nOutdoor activities and sports.\nOutdoor hobbies include bird feeding, birdwatching, canoeing, gardening, hiking, walking, and sports such as baseball, bowling, cycling, fishing, hunting, and sailing.\nOther hobbies.\nMany people spend a lot of time in leisure activities that are not necessarily called hobbies. Some people disapprove of spending time on these activities. These activities include watching too much television, drinking alcohol, and taking illegal drugs."}
{"id": "3454", "revid": "7791388", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3454", "title": "World Trade Center (1973\u20132001)", "text": "The original World Trade Center (WTC) was a complex of buildings in Lower Manhattan, New York, New York, United States which was destroyed in the September 11, 2001 attacks; a new complex is mostly complete and is built on the site of the old one.\nThe biggest buildings in the original World Trade Center were the Twin Towers. The North Tower was the tallest building in the world when it was built. Taller ones were built later. The Twin Towers had 110 stories, and, at the time of its destruction, were the two tallest in New York. They and 7 World Trade Center were destroyed in the September 11, 2001 attacks and other buildings were damaged beyond repair.\nThe original World Trade Center was designed by Minoru Yamasaki in the early 1960s using a tube-frame structural design for the twin 110-story towers. In gaining approval for the project, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey agreed to take over the Hudson &amp; Manhattan Railroad which became the Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH).\nGroundbreaking for the World Trade Center took place on August 5, 1966. The North Tower, officially World Trade Center 1 was completed in December 1970 and the South Tower, officially World Trade Center 2 was finished in July 1971. Construction of the World Trade Center involved excavating a large amount of material that was then used in making Battery Park City on the west side of Lower Manhattan.\nTerrorist attacks.\nFebruary 26, 1993, bombing.\nThe first terrorist attack on the World Trade Center occurred on February 26, 1993, at 12:17 PM. A truck filled with 680\u00a0kg of explosives, planted by Ramzi Yousef, exploded in the underground garage of the 1 WTC. The bombing created a 30\u00a0m (100\u00a0ft) hole through five sublevels. Six people were killed and 1,042 others were injured during escape attempts. Many people inside the tower were forced to walk down darkened stairwells with no emergency lighting, some taking two hours or more to reach safety. As a memorial to the victims of the bombing of the tower, a reflecting pool was installed with the names of those who were killed.\nSeptember 11 attacks.\nOn September 11, 2001, Al-Qaeda terrorists hijacked American Airlines Flight 11 and crashed it into the 1 WTC, striking between the 93rd and 99th floors, killing 1,344 people. Seventeen minutes later, a second group crashed the hijacked United Airlines Flight 175 into the WTC, striking between the 77th and 85th floors, fewer than 700 were killed. At 5:20\u00a0p.m., 7 World Trade Center started to collapse with the crumble of the east penthouse. The Vista Hotel was destroyed during the collapse of the twin towers. The three remaining buildings in the WTC plaza were damaged by debris and later were demolished. Many conspiracy theories have appeared which say that certain people in the United States government knew about the attacks beforehand, or even made them happen.\nMemorials.\nThe National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum (also known as the 9/11 Memorial &amp; Museum) is a memorial and museum in World Trade Center site, as the memorial of the 9/11 attacks, which killed 2,977 people, and the 1993 bombing, which killed six. It is operated by a non-profit institution whose mission is to raise funds for, program, and operate the memorial and museum at the World Trade Center site. The National September 11 Memorial opened on September 11, 2011, and the museum opened in May 2014."}
{"id": "3455", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3455", "title": "Hour", "text": "An hour (abbreviation: h or hr) is a unit of measurement used to measure time. An hour is equal to 60 minutes. 24 hours are equal to one day. Unlike the second, the hour is not a base SI unit."}
{"id": "3456", "revid": "7121684", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3456", "title": "Minute", "text": "A minute is a customary unit of time. It is equal to 60 seconds. There are 60 minutes in an hour. Unlike the second, the minute is not an SI unit.\nA minute is also of a degree. In this context, a minute is also called an arcminute, and is written with the formula_1 symbol.\nFor example, the Sun and Moon both have angular diameters of about 30 arcminutes\u2014when seen from Earth."}
{"id": "3457", "revid": "937699", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3457", "title": "Coat", "text": "A coat is a piece of clothing that is worn over a person's upper body. It can be used to keep warm or dry (a raincoat). It also may be worn to make a person look good. A coat usually has long sleeves, and is fastened at the front. Sometimes it includes collars, shoulder straps and hoods. One type of coat is a jacket."}
{"id": "3458", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3458", "title": "Study skills", "text": "Study skills or study strategies are systematic ways to improve learning. They are needed for success in school, especially for college and beyond. Study skills include numerous techniques and skills that help in acquiring and retaining information. Some are assessment tools that help a student see where they need help most.\nStudy skills might include a learner's ability to listen, read, understand, concentrate, remember and organise their learning material, and manage studying time. "}
{"id": "3459", "revid": "935234", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3459", "title": "Head", "text": "The head is the part of the body where the brain is. It is also where the face is. Different things may be worn on the head, for example a headband or a hat.\nSome people get pains in their head occasionally, known as headaches. Also, some people have worse pains in their head called migraines.\nA \"head\" in English can also mean a person in charge of something, such as the head of a company.\nAlso, the word \"head\" can also mean the front of something. An example of this is the word \"Headline\", meaning large words on the front page of a newspaper."}
{"id": "3460", "revid": "103360", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3460", "title": "Norway", "text": "Norway is a country in the north of Europe. It is the western part of the Scandinavian peninsula. The mainland of Norway is surrounded by the North Sea and Atlantic Ocean on the west side, and borders Russia, Finland, and Sweden to the east. The southern coast touches the Oslofjord, Skagerrak, and the North Sea.\nThe Monarchy of Norway has been independent since 1814. Its head of state is a king - Harald the 5th (as of 2017). The national day is May 17, which celebrates Norway's constitution of 1814. The parliament is called \"Stortinget\" and its members are elected by the people every 4 years.\nAbout 5 million people live in Norway. The capital is the city of Oslo.\nNorwegian is the national language. There are two official written versions of Norwegian called \"Bokm\u00e5l\" and \"Nynorsk\".\nThe Northern Sami language is spoken by around 90% of those who speak one of Norway's 3 Sami languages. Northern Sami is also an official language in a number of municipalities.\nHistory.\nThe battle of Hafrsfjord (872 A.D.) resulted in small kingdoms becoming one larger kingdom, ruled by Harald Fairhair. After the king's death, again there were smaller kingdoms, inside Norway.\nStockfish (or fish that has been freeze-dried, outside in cold weather) has been traded and exported; this happened as early as either the 9th century, 10th century, or 11th century until 1066. Other sources say that the exporting was happening as early as the 12th century; stockfish is one of the country's oldest [type of] things to be sold for export.\nIn 1349 half of the Norwegian people died, getting sick from the bubonic plague (or Black Death).\nWhen a Norwegian king died in 1387, there was no Norwegian king until the 20th century.\nIn 1397, Denmark, Norway and Sweden began the Kalmar Union.\nThe first [known] map, where Norway is drawn, was made in 1482.\nSweden left the Kalmar Union in 1523. From 1536/1537, Denmark and Norway formed a personal union that by 1660 became the state called Denmark\u2013Norway; Norway was the weaker part of the union with Denmark. That union lasted until 1814, when the Treaty of Kiel said that Norway be ceded (or given) to Sweden; Denmark did not cede the Faroe Islands, Iceland, and Greenland\nThe Norwegian constitution was written in 1814 and signed on 17th May that year. However, Denmark, on the losing side of the Napoleon wars, lost Norway to Sweden, on the winning side.\nA Swedish\u2013Norwegian War started on 26 July 1814. It ended on 14 August, because of an agreement, called the Convention of Moss.\nThe union with Sweden: It started on 14 August 1814, when the Convention of Moss was signed; the union went on for 90 years.\nThe results of the election in 1882, led to parlamentarism becoming part of Norway's political system; the votes of the \"swamp men\" decided the outcome of the election; they included teachers, artists and craftsmen who were not poor but also did not own land; ownership of land or a contract to use land was necessary to get voting rights; the \"swamp men\" had bough cheap land which was nearly useless, except for getting a right to vote.\nThe right to vote in [ national and local ] elections, was given to the public (or the general public) in 1898.\nThe end of the Union of Sweden and Norway, was on 7 June 1905, when Norway got its independence.\nIn 1905 Prince Carl of Denmark was elected King of Norway. His name as a king, was King Haakon VII.\nIn World War I, Norway was neutral and served as a trading nation.\nNorway tried to stay neutral in World War II, but was occupied by German forces from 9 April 1940 to 8 May 1945.\nIn 1952 Norway became a member of NATO.\nOil was found in Norway's part of the North Sea, during the 1960s; the oil was found under the sea floor.\nRoyal family since 1905.\nKing Haakon VII was already married, before he came to Norway (in 1905). His wife, Princess Maud, became Queen Maud. Their son, Prince Alexander of Denmark, became Crown Prince Olav and followed after his father as King Olav V in 1957. Olav and his wife, Crown Princess M\u00e4rtha, had three children; Princess Ragnhild, Princess Astrid and Prince Harald (later Crown Prince Harald and in 1991 he followed his father as King Harald V).\nKing Harald is the first king born in Norway in over 600 years. He has two children; Princess M\u00e4rtha Louise and Crown Prince Haakon Magnus.\nGovernment.\nMinistry of Defence.\nThe Government has Norwegian soldiers working in Syria (as of 2017) and Afghanistan, together with soldiers from other countries that belong to NATO.\nEconomy.\nExports include :\nnatural gas, oil, hydroelectric power, and fish.\nOther natural resources are agriculture, forests, and minerals.\nThe government collects much money from various sources, and has policies intended to spread this wealth among Norwegians. This spread of wealth, is done both directly and indirectly.\n[Including year 2020], the fishing industry is catching between 2.5 million tons and 3 million tons fish from the ocean per year; from fish farms around 1.5 million tons are slaughtered per year.\nEthnicity.\nAt the end of 2020, immigrants and people who were born in Norway, but who had two parents who were immigrants, they were 18.5 percent of the population; from those (two categories), 11.8% came from Poland. \nMost people in Norway are ethnic Norwegians. Norwegians speak a language that is related to German and English. Swedish and Danish are so close to Norwegian that most Norwegians understand them. Across Norway, many different dialects are spoken. Norwegians disagree on how to make one correct written language. Therefore, there are two standard languages, Bokm\u00e5l and Nynorsk. Nynorsk is used in writing in most of the western areas and in the central mountains. Bokm\u00e5l is written by most people in the rest of the country.\nA native population of Norway, the Sami people, has its home in the northern parts of the country. Their language is not at all related to Norwegian. In some parishes in the far north, they make up the majority of people. Many Sami now live outside the Sami homeland, mostly in Oslo and other big cities. Earlier, Sami people were forced to speak Norwegian in school. Now Sami is taught as the first language in school for Sami children, and Norwegian is the first foreign language.\nMany immigrants have come to Norway in the last 30\u201340 years. They mostly live in and around Oslo, and in the other big cities. Many immigrants come from nearby countries, like Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Poland and Russia. There are also many from countries far away, such as Pakistan, Somalia, Iraq and Vietnam.\nTraditionally, all Norwegians were Lutherans, a variety of the Protestant faith. Still, more than 80% of Norwegians are Lutherans. Other important faiths include Islam, other Protestant groups and Catholicism.\nTourism.\nAmong tourists to Norway, more come from Germany than from any other country. There are also many Swedes, Danes, British, Dutch and Italians visiting Norway. The Swedes and Danes often come in winter to go skiing. The others mainly come in summer. Many people visit Norway to see the Northern Lights, also known as the 'Aurora Borealis'.\nMedia.\nThe largest national newspapers in Norway are Verdens Gang (VG), Aftenposten and Dagbladet.\nCulture.\nNorwegian culture can be compared to English culture in the way that it is considered a bad thing to show off, as opposed to the US, where this is more acceptable. This is a big aspect of Norwegian culture, and it is related to the philosophy of egalitarianism. Because of this, people will understate things, for example if a Norwegian says something is good or nice, it can mean that it's really great.\nItems from the Viking Age (in Norway), are shown in museums: One item is the Gokstad ship.\nMuseums in Norway includes The Ibsen Museum - named after Henrik Ibsen.\nThe farmers' culture (\"bondekulturen\") was brutal.\nUnwanted babies were \"placed in the forest\" (\"sette barn p\u00e5 skogen\") to die, until the nineteenth century; in the end, the [rural] police authority - consisting of individuals called lensmann - were able to control [and stop] these crimes.\nModern, cambered skis were invented in the Norwegian province of Telemark in the early 19th century.\nPolitics.\nIn Norway power is shared among three branches: The justice sector, the government and the parliament (Stortinget). Norway also has a king, Harald V, but he does not have any real power and acts as a symbol and ambassador. This form of government is called a constitutional monarchy. Elections are held every four years, and the winner of the election is the party or coalition of parties that gets the most votes and seats in the parliament. After the elections are done, the winners work together to find out who the prime minister should be, as well as who the other ministers should be.\nHere is a short summary of the biggest political parties in Norway, from left to right on the political axis:\nThe Conservative Party and the Progress Party are currently working together in a coalition government, after getting elected in the 2013 elections. It's also a minority government, so it has to work together with the other parties in the parliament to make change.\nLargest cities.\nThe city with the most people living there (or inhabitants) is Oslo. The city of Bergen has 272,000 people living there; the city of Trondheim has 182,000 people in its population.\nSome claim that Bergen and Trondheim, each had their time as Norway's capital during the Middle Ages."}
{"id": "3461", "revid": "7790746", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3461", "title": "Albania", "text": "Albania ( ; ), officially called the Republic of Albania is an independent republic in Southeastern Europe, with an area of . The capital is Tirana, and other important cities are Durr\u00ebs, Elbasan and Vlora. Over 3 million people live in Albania. The majority of Albanians are Muslims with 55%, 23% Eastern Orthodox and 15% Roman Catholics.\nAlbania is next to Serbia, Montenegro, Greece and North Macedonia and Kosovo. It has a coast on the Adriatic Sea in the west, and a coast on the Ionian Sea in the southwest. The official language is Albanian. The national anthem is \"Hymni i Flamurit\".\nHistory.\nAlbania was the southern part of \"Illyria\" during the Roman Empire. In the Middle Ages the Albanians were ruled by many foreign countries, including the Byzantine and Venetian Empires and during the 16th century resistance to the Ottoman Empire's rule was led by the Albanian national hero \"Skanderberg\" but his real name was Gjergj Kastrioti. After four centuries of Turkish domination, finally in the 20th century an independent Albania was created. In 1939 Albania was conquered by fascist Italy and was part of the Kingdom of Italy until 1943. After World War II Albania became independent again, under communist rule. It was ruled by Enver Hoxha, who died in 1985. Ramiz Alia took over and also later became President when, in 1992, Albania returned to democracy, and it now has friendly relations with the European Union, which it has applied to join.\nDivisions.\nAlbania is divided into 12 counties. These counties include 36 districts and 373 municipalities \nCities.\nThis is a list of the largest cities in Albania.\nArmed forces.\nThe Albanian Armed Forces were first formed after independence in 1912. Albania reduced the number of active troops from 65,000 in 1988 to 14,500 in 2009. The military now is mostly a small fleet of aircraft and sea vessels.\nGeography.\nAlbania has a total area of 28,748 square kilometers. Albania's coastline length is . It goes along the Adriatic and Ionian Seas. On the coast there are mild, wet winters and warm, sunny, and rather dry summers.\n70% of the country is mountains. The highest mountain is Korab.\nAlbania is bordered by Greece, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Kosovo. A short stretch of sea separates Albania from the far southeast of Italy.\nFlora and fauna.\nAlthough a small country, Albania has a lot of variety in plants and animals. The total number of plants is over 3250 species. There are over 350 bird species, 330 freshwater and marine fish and 80 mammal species. The Golden Eagle is the national symbol of Albania."}
{"id": "3462", "revid": "1141870", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3462", "title": "Hungary", "text": "Hungary is a country in Central Europe. Its capital city is Budapest. Hungary is slightly bigger than its western neighbour Austria and has about 10 million inhabitants. Other countries that border Hungary are Slovakia, Ukraine, Romania, Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia. Hungary's official language is the Hungarian language. It has been a member of the European Union (EU) since 2004. In Hungarian, the country is called \"Magyarorsz\u00e1g\" (literally, \"Hungarian country\"), or \"Magyar K\u00f6zt\u00e1rsas\u00e1g\" (Hungarian Republic). This is named after the Magyar tribes who came to Hungary in the late 9th century.\nHistory.\nMedieval Hungary, 896-1526.\nThe Magyars established Hungary in 896, after they had arrived there from their previous, Eastern European territories. Prince \u00c1rp\u00e1d was their leader at the time; he also established the first royal house of the country, the \u00c1rp\u00e1d-house. In 1000, after the first king, Saint Stephen had been crowned, the country became a Kingdom.\nIn 1241, the Mongol Empire invaded the country, causing the Hungarian king B\u00e9la IV to flee and approximately 500,000 Hungarians were killed, along with with heavy damage. In 1301, the \u00c1rp\u00e1d-house died out. Later on, kings from various houses ruled over Hungary. The greatest of them is Matthias Corvinus, famous for taking Austrian terrirories like Vienna, etc. and protecting the country against Ottoman aggression. However, some decades after he had died (1490), the Ottoman Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent defeated the Hungarian king in the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs (1526). The Kingdom was cut up into three parts: the western and northern areas remained Hungary, the southern region fell under Ottoman rule, and the eastern part became an Ottoman vassal as the Principality of Transylvania.\nBetween 1526 and 1867.\nThe Kingdom of Hungary became a Habsburg dependency, because an agreement made in Vienna in 1515 said that the Habsburg family would take over the territory of the Jagellion family in Bohemia and Hungary if the line of kings should die out. In 1686, the Ottomans were forced to leave, and the country was reunified. Many nationalities were living in the country at this time. Along with Hungarians, there were also the ancestors of modern Slovaks, Serbs, and Romanians.\nIn 1703, Francis II R\u00e1k\u00f3czi, a Hungarian nobleman organized a revolution against the Habsburgs, as the Hungarians were not satisfied with them. However, his revolution failed in 1711, and he had to go into exile. The next most important event is the \"Hungarian Revolution of 1848\", when the inhabitants of the country mutinied again. Fighting ended in 1849, with Habsburg success. The leaders of the revolution were executed.\nAustria-Hungary, 1867-1918.\nThe country tried to find the way towards consolidation: in 1867, the two most important Habsburg territories, Austria and Hungary signed a treaty, and they established the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. The new situation was feasible for both sides: the agreement brought massive economic growth.\nBetween 1918 and 1946.\nIn 1918 after the defeat in World War I, the Kingdom was abolished, and a republic was established, as people had enough of war. This republic was short-lived, and soon the Communists seized power (1919). Their rule was irresponsible and many people, including the peasants and the intelligentsia, were tortured. The communists had to abandon the country as Romanian troops invaded.\nIn late 1919, the Hungarian forces, led by Admiral Mikl\u00f3s Horthy, finally occupied the capital, Budapest. In response to the communist terror, they launched the \"White Terror\", in which they persecuted the communists and their supporters. The kingdom was re-established but there was no king. Horthy was elected as the regent of the country, as the assembly decided not to recall the Habsburgs.\nHungary lost the war. According to the Treaty of Trianon (1920), Hungary lost two thirds of its territory. In the majority of these territories, non-Hungarians were the majority; however, many Hungarians also found themselves outside their country, in the nation state of Romanians or Slovaks. Thus, the main political goal of the governments under Horthy was to revise this treaty, and at least, to regain the Hungarian-inhabited lands.\nCommunist Hungary, 1946-1989.\nAfter the fall of Nazi Germany, Soviet troops occupied all of the country. So Hungary gradually became a communist satellite state of the Soviet Union. After 1948, Communist leader M\u00e1ty\u00e1s R\u00e1kosi established Stalinist rule in the country. He forced collectivization and a planned economy. This led to the 1956 Hungarian Revolution. Hungary withdrew from the Warsaw Pact. But the Soviets sent in over 150,000 troops and 2,500 tanks. Nearly a quarter of a million people left the country during the brief time that the borders were open in 1956. J\u00e1nos K\u00e1d\u00e1r became leader of the communist party. In 1991 Soviet military presence in Hungary ended, and the transition to a market economy began.\nRepublic of Hungary, 1989 onwards.\nToday, Hungary is a democratic republic. Elections are held every four years.\nThe current president of the country is J\u00e1nos \u00c1der, and the prime minister is Viktor Orb\u00e1n. Orb\u00e1n was Prime Minister from 1998 to 2002, and was elected again in 2010.\nDemographics.\nHungarians make up the largest part of the population but there are also several other ethnic communities. The largest of these are the Roma and Germans. Hungarian is the most widely used language in Hungary. Ethnic communities often use their own languages as well. The majority of Hungarians are religious, mainly Roman Catholic and Calvinist (in Hungarian 'reform\u00e1tus' - 'reformed'). There are Jews, often in intellectual and artistic occupations, and some Muslims. Orthodox Christianity is practised by ethnic minorities from eastern Europe.\nGeography.\nHungary's highest point is \"K\u00e9kestet\u0151\" (1014\u00a0m; in the northeastern part of Hungary). The River Danube, one of Europe's largest rivers, divides Hungary into a western and an eastern part. The region west of the Danube is called Transdanubia (\"Dun\u00e1nt\u00fal\"). Transdanubia has a hilly landscape and many small villages and towns. The large flat area in the eastern part is the Great Plains (\"Alf\u00f6ld\"). Along the Slovakian border there are mountains.\nLake Balaton, Central Europe's largest lake can be found in Hungary. This small country has several thermal spas too. Lake H\u00e9v\u00edz is one of the world's largest thermal lakes. Hungary, however is a landlocked country (it has no coastline).\nIts biggest cities are Budapest, Debrecen, Miskolc, Szeged, P\u00e9cs, Gy\u0151r, Ny\u00edregyh\u00e1za and Szolnok. Szolnok is found at the juncture of the Tisza River and the Zagyva River (stream)."}
{"id": "3463", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3463", "title": "Netherlands", "text": "The Netherlands is a country that is part (of a constituent country) of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Most of it is in Western Europe, but there are also some parts in the Caribbean. More than 17 million people live there. To the north and west of the European part of the Netherlands is the North Sea, and to the east is Germany and to the south is Belgium. The Netherlands is one of the countries that started the European Union. People who live in the Netherlands are called \"Dutch\". The language of the Netherlands is also called Dutch. The official capital of the Netherlands is Amsterdam. However, the government is in The Hague.\nName.\n\"The Netherlands\" means \"the low lands\". The land only rises, on average, 1\u00a0meter above sea level. One third of the land is below sea level. The Netherlands is also - incorrectly - referred to as Holland. Holland was a very rich area (two provinces) in the western part of the Netherlands, thus causing people to be mistaken. Some people who do not live in the western part of the Netherlands do not like it when people call the country Holland. The name \"Holland\" originates from the old Dutch words \"Holt land\" which means \"wood lands\".\nHistory.\nAt the end of the Middle Ages the dukes of Burgundy, a country that is now part of France, united seventeen areas. Those areas were called the Netherlands. When the daughter of a duke married Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor in 1477, the Netherlands became part of Spain. In the 16th century many Dutch people became Protestant. The king of Spain did not like it, he wanted all Dutch to be Roman Catholic. Of course the Dutch people did not like this, and after violent excesses by the Spanish they started a war against Spain in 1568, also for reasons of taxation. The war lasted until 1648, therefore it is called the Eighty Years' War. An important leader of the Dutch in this war was Willem van Oranje (Willem of orange) also called William the Silent.\nIn 1648 the Netherlands and Spain signed peace. The Dutch people were allowed to keep all the areas they conquered. The part of the Netherlands that was not conquered by the Dutch stayed part of Spain. Later this part became the country Belgium.\nWhen the Netherlands became independent, it was a very special country. That time almost all countries in Europe were ruled by a king, but the Netherlands was a republic. The Netherlands was made up of seven provinces, that were ruled by the big cities. The cities were ruled by the municipality which consisted of rich civilians. Together those provinces were ruled by a stadtholder, a very powerful man, but compared to the kings of other European countries he had much less power.\nIn the 17th century the Netherlands was the richest and one of the most powerful countries in the world. Therefore, the Dutch call the 17th century the Golden Age. Their Dutch Empire had colonies around the world. One important colony was the East Indies, which is now called Indonesia. They also had colonies in the Caribbean, like the other European empires. They also started New Netherland, which is now called New York. The Netherlands often fought wars against other European countries, especially the Anglo-Dutch Wars against England. Michiel de Ruyter, a Dutch admiral, became a Dutch hero when he defeated the English navy close to London.\nIn the 18th century the Netherlands became poorer. Many people blamed this on the government leaders, the stadtholders. Many thought they had too much power and wanted them to get away. In 1789 the French people deposed (got rid of) their king. French armies attacked other countries to depose their leaders too. In 1795 they attacked the Netherlands. Stadtholder William V had to flee to England. The Netherlands were renamed to Batavian Republic and became a democracy. But the French were not content (satisfied) with the Dutch ruler, so in 1806 the French emperor Napoleon made his brother Louis Bonaparte king of the Netherlands. Louis became popular in the Netherlands, but the emperor was again not content with him, so in 1810 the Netherlands became a part of France.\nIn 1815 Napoleon was defeated, and the Netherlands became independent again. The rulers of European countries thought it was a good idea to make the Netherlands stronger, to make them able to resist another French invasion. Therefore, Belgium and Luxembourg were added to the Netherlands. William I, the son of stadtholder William V, became king. Some Belgians disliked their Dutch king. In 1830 they revolted. William sent an army. He was much more powerful than the Belgians but after ten days the French sent an army to support them. In 1831 the Belgians chose their own king and Belgium became an independent country.\nSome people again thought the Dutch king had too much power. They wanted to give him less power and vote for the government themselves. In 1848 there were violent revolts against the kings of many European countries. The Dutch king was afraid the same would happen in the Netherlands. Therefore, he allowed Johan Rudolf Thorbecke to write a constitution. From then on people were allowed to vote. At first only rich men were allowed to vote. From 1919 on all adults were allowed to vote.\nIn World War I, the Netherlands did not fight and were not invaded. The Dutch wanted to stay neutral in World War II as well, but in 1940 the country was invaded and occupied by Germany. Like in other countries they had occupied, the German authorities started to kill Jews. Anne Frank was a Jewish girl who lived in the Netherlands. Her family hid from the Nazis and she wrote a diary. She died in a Nazi concentration camp and her diary became famous.\nIn 1944 the American, Canadian, Polish and British armies liberated the south of the Netherlands from Nazi Occupation. They wanted to cross the Rhine river in Operation Market Garden to liberate the rest of the country, but they were defeated. It took until May 1945 before the entire country was liberated. During the five years of Nazi occupation, 250,000 people had died in the Netherlands.\nShortly after the war, Indonesia declared its independence. The Dutch sent soldiers to fight in Indonesia. After other countries, including the United States, told the Dutch to leave Indonesia, they finally did so in 1949.\nAfter the war the Netherlands became one of the richest countries in the world. In 2004 the United Nations said that the Netherlands was the 5th best country to live in.\nPolitics.\nThe Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy. That means the country has a king, but the real power is in the hands of a parliament, chosen by the Dutch people. All Dutch people at least 18 years old or older are allowed to vote. The Dutch parliament consists of two chambers: the Second Chamber (Dutch: \"Tweede Kamer\", this is the House of Representatives, elected every four years), and the First Chamber (Dutch: \"Eerste Kamer\", this is the Senate, elected by provincial politicians every four years). After the Second Chamber elections, parties that have had a majority of the votes create a cabinet. The cabinet consists of a prime minister and several other ministers and deputy ministers. Current government is the liberal-Christian democratic Third Rutte cabinet, consisting of VVD, CDA, D66 and CU politicians. Prime Minister is Mark Rutte (VVD).\nThe latest general elections were held on March 17, 2021. Winners were liberal parties like VVD (also the biggest party), D66 (second biggest party) and Volt, and populist parties like FVD and JA21. Losers were left parties like SP and GL, Christian democratic party CDA, populist party PVV, and senior citizen party 50+.\nThe Netherlands is known for tolerance in politics. The Netherlands is the only country where soft drugs are not entirely considered illegal. Furthermore, the Netherlands is one of the few countries that allow same-sex marriages, euthanasia and prostitution to a certain extent.\nMore information: \"Politics of the Netherlands\".\nSubdivisions.\nThe Netherlands is subdivided in provinces and municipalities.\nProvinces.\nIn the Netherlands there are 12 provinces:\nThese provinces are all located in the part of the Netherlands that is in Europe. The country also includes three special municipalities in the Caribbean: Bonaire, Saba and Sint Eustatius. They are not part of any province, but together are known as the Caribbean Netherlands. The Netherlands (both the European part and the Caribbean Netherlands), together with Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten, also in the Caribbean, form a sovereign state called the Kingdom of the Netherlands.\nWhen the Kingdom was formed in 1954, the territories in the Caribbean became part of the Netherlands Antilles. At that time it also included Suriname in South America, which became an independent country in 1975. Aruba left the Antilles in 1986, and Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten did the same in 2010. The rest of the islands then became the Caribbean Netherlands which is part of the Netherlands proper.\nMunicipalities.\nThe Netherlands has 352 municipalities (2021) and also three special municipalities in the so-called Caribbean Netherlands.\nAlmost every year the amount of municipalities decrease.\nCities.\nCities aren't actually a subdivision of the Netherlands. Cities are also municipalities or they make part of municipalities.\nThis is a list of the cities with over 100,000 people.\nGeography.\nIn fact a large part of the Netherlands was created by the sand that came from the many rivers flowing through it. Notable Dutch rivers are the Rhine, the Maas, the IJssel and the Scelt. A large part of the Netherlands is below sea level. This is because the Dutch have made many lakes and parts of the sea dry, creating polders. Therefore, there is a saying \"God created the earth, but the Dutch created the Netherlands.\" This makes the Netherlands very flat. In the very south-east of the Netherlands, in Limburg, there are some hills. Therefore, this region is a tourist-attraction for many Dutch people. The highest point in the European portion of the Netherlands, the Vaalserberg, is 323\u00a0metres above sea level. The highest point in both the Netherlands proper and the Kingdom of the Netherlands is Mount Scenery, on the Caribbean island of Saba, at 887\u00a0metres.\nThe Netherlands is a small flat country; about 300\u00a0kilometers from north to south, and about 170\u00a0kilometers from east to west. It has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification).\nPeople.\nThe Netherlands is a small country, but many people live there. It is one of the most densely populated countries of the world.\nMost people in the Netherlands speak Dutch. In Friesland, about 200,000 people speak Frisian. Frisian is the language with the most similarities to English. Some Dutch people speak dialects. The Saxon dialects spoken in the northeastern part of the Netherlands are somewhat similar to Low German.\nAccording to a survey done in 2006, 25% of the Dutch people are Christian and 3% believe in another organised religion, like Judaism, Islam or Hinduism. Twenty-six percent are 'unbounded spiritual' (have their own beliefs and are not tied to a religion). The other 44% are not religious.\nTrains.\nNederlandse Spoorwegen () or NS is the main passenger railway operator in the Netherlands. The rail infrastructure is maintained by network manager ProRail, which was split from NS in 2003. Freight services, formerly operated by NS Cargo, merged with the DB Schenker group in 2000.\nNS runs 4,800 scheduled trains daily. In addition, NS provides international rail services from the Netherlands to other European destinations and carries out concessions on a number of foreign rail markets through its subsidiary Abellio such as Abellio Greater Anglia, Merseyrail and ScotRail.\nArriva is another passenger railway operator in the Netherlands. It is a subsidiary of the German company Deutsche Bahn. Their local headquarters is based at Heerenveen. They have been active since 1998.\nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "3464", "revid": "25713", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3464", "title": "Ukraine", "text": "Ukraine (, ) is a country in Eastern Europe. Russia is to the north-east of Ukraine, Belarus is to the north-west, Poland and Slovakia are to the west, Hungary, Romania, Moldova and self-proclaimed Transnistria are to the south-west and the Black Sea is to the south.\nUkraine is a republic.\nThe capital of Ukraine is Kyiv (). It was a part of the Soviet Union from 1922 until 1991.\nOfficial language.\nThe official language of Ukraine is Ukrainian (, [ukrajin\u2019s\u2019ka mova]). In the 2001 census, about 29% of people in Ukraine said that they consider Russian to be their main language. These two East Slavic languages are similar in some ways but different in other ways.\nDivision of Ukraine.\nUkraine is divided into 24 oblasts and one Autonomous Republic of Crimea. \nThe largest cities of Ukraine.\nThe largest cities in Ukraine are:\nName origin.\nThe name \"Ukraine\" (u-krayina) is variously interpreted as \"edge\" or \"borderland\", but this was proved false. Language specialists are still searching for the true meaning of the word.\nIt was first used in reference to a core part of the territory of Kyivan Rus in the 12th century. In English, Ukraine was usually used as \"the Ukraine\". But after 1991, adding \"the\" is no longer correct. \nHistory.\nAncient times.\nMany different tribes lived on the territory of modern Ukraine since pre-historical times. Most historians believe that the Great Steppe at the North of the Black Sea was a homeland of all Indo-European and Indo-Iranian languages. Some believe it was also a birthplace of the whole Caucasian race. Wends, Goths, Huns, Sclaveni, Avars and other tribes and tribal groups fought among themselves, joined unions, terminated and assimilated each other.\nBy the middle of 4th century AD Antes joined other tribes and established a state under their rule. Their state fell under the pressure of Avars in 602\u00a0AD and their name was longer mentioned. Since the 7th century over 10 tribal groups joined under the name \"Slavs\" and made their own state named Rus. The chronicles mention three centers which formed this state: Kuyavia (Kyiv land with Kyiv itself), Slavia (Novgorod land) and Artania (exact location unknown).\nHistorians still argue about whether Kyiv was founded by Slavs themselves, or they just captured the Khazar fortress which was located on the bank of the Dnieper river, but since the 10th century, it became the capital of the largest and most powerful state in Europe.\nKyivan Rus.\nKyivan Rus, is the medieval state of Eastern Slavs. Established by the Slavic with the help of the Varangian squads whose force was used to integrate separate tribes and their lands into one powerful state. Varangian princes, who ruled Rus from its first years were gradually assimilated by natives, but the dynasty started by semy-legendary Ririk survived and continued to govern their separate principalities even after the collapse of Rus.\nAt an early stage of its existence Rus destroyed such powerful states as the Khazar Khaganate and Old Great Bulgaria. Rus princes successfully fought against the Byzantine Empire, whose emperors had to pay tribute to them. Rus' finally disintegrated into separate principalities.\nIn the reign of Volodymyr the Great (980-1015) the Kyivan State almost finished its expansion. It occupied the territory from Peipus, Ladoga and Onega lakes in the north to the river Don, Ros, Sula, Southern Bug in the south, from the Dniester, the Carpathians, the Neman, Western Dvina River in the west to the Volga and the Oka River in the east, its area became about 800,000\u00a0km2. Although some of his predecessors already accepted Christianity for themselves, Vladimir decided to convert the entire population of the state to the new religion. Partially with the help of Byzantine missionaries preachers, partly by the brutal violence, he finally made all Kyiv population to be baptized. For this action, the Ukrainian, and later the Russian Orthodox Churches canonized him under the name of Vladimir the Baptist.\nDuring the reign of Yaroslav the Wise, (1019\u20131054), Rus reached the zenith of its cultural development and military power. Rus raised the prestige of Eastern Slavs in Europe, improved the international significance of Kyiv. Rus influenced the political relations in all of Europe, Western Asia, and in the Middle East. Kyivan princes supported the political, economic, dynastic relations with France, Sweden, England, Poland, Hungary, Norway, Byzantium.\nThe Rus state also ruled non-Slavic people (Finno-Ugric population of the North, Turkic of the East and South, Balts of the West etc.). Those people gradually assimilated with the Slavs, and with each other, establishing a framework for the future emergence of three new Eastern-Slavic peoples.\nThe Kyivan State was an eastern outpost of European Christendom, it kept the movement of nomad hordes to the West, and reduced their onslaught against Byzantium and Central European countries.\nAfter the death of Mstyslav Volodymyrovych (1132), Rus lost its political unity and finally was divided into 15 principalities and lands. Among them Kyiv, Chernygiv, Volodymyr-Suzdal, Novgorod, Smolensk, Polotsk, and Halycian lands and principalities were most large and powerful.\nMajor political conditions of fragmentation were:\nWhile Kyiv was the center of all social, economic, political, cultural and ideological life in the country for a long time before, other centers have competed with it from the mid-12th century. There were old powers (Novgorod, Smolensk, Polotsk), as well as new ones..\nNumerous princely feuds, large and small wars between different lords, were tearing Rus. However, the ancient Ukrainian state did not fall apart. It only changed the form of its government: The personal monarchy was replaced by the federal one, Rus came to be co-ruled by the group of the most influential and powerful princes. Historians call this way of governing \"the collective suzerainty.\" The Principality of Kyiv remained a national center, and the residence of bishops.\nIn 1206 the new powerful military-feudal Mongolian state headed by Genghis Khan started the war of conquest against his neighbors. In 1223 in the battle near the Kalka river 25,000 Tatar-Mongols won a crushing victory over the squads of Southern Rus Princes, who were unable to come together even in the face of grave danger. Under the leadership of Batu, Genghis Khan's grandson, from 1237-1238, they conquered Riazan, Volodymir, Suzdal, and Yaroslavl lands.\nIn 1240, they attacked Kyiv. The city was plundered and destroyed. According to the legend, the enemy saved governor Dimitri's life for his personal courage in the battle. Then Kamenetz, Iziaslav, Volodymyr, and Halych lost against invaders. Batu was able to attach most of Rus to his empire, the Golden Horde, which covered the whole territory from the Urals to the Black Sea,\nAfter the fall of Kyivan State, the political, economic and cultural center of Ukrainian lands was transferred to the Halycian-Volyn Land. In 1245 Prince Danylo of Halych had to admit his dependence on the Golden Horde. Hoping to get help from Catholic Europe in his the struggle for independence, he also made a secret alliance with Poland, Hungary, Masovia and the Teutonic Knights. In 1253 he received the crown from Pope Innocent IV and became a King of Rus. In 1259, due to the lack of military aid from the West, the king was forced to re-recognize the supremacy of the Horde. His successor, Lev I had to take part in theTartar campaigns against Poland and Lithuania.\nIn 1308 the government moved to Danylo's grandchildren - Andrew and Lev II, who started the new struggle against the Golden Horde allied with the Teutonic knights and princes of Mazowia. However, after their death the last monarch Yuri II again had to claim himself as the Golden Horde vassal. He was murdered in 1340 and his death gave the rise to Poland and Lithuania (the neighbors who had a dynastic right for the throne of Rus) to start a war for the Halycian-Volyn heritage. In 1392 Galicia, with Belz and Chelm Lands were finally icorporated to the Kingdom of Poland and Volhynia to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.\nAt the end of the 14th century, Ukrainian territories were divided between different states. Lithuania seized Kyiv, Chernihiv and Volyn Lands. Poland ruled in Halycian and Podolian. The Southern Ukraine was under the rule of the Crimean Khanate (formed in 1447) and the Eastern under the power of Muscovy. In 1569 Lithuania and Poland merged to the united state called Commonwealth (Polish: Rzecypospolyta) to deal with neighbors, as a result, the central Ukrainian lands of Lithuania came under Polish control.\nEtymology.\nRus, or The Kyivan State, , ; often misspeled as \"Kievan State\" or even \"Kievan Rus\", using Russian spelling of its capital Kyiv ( [\u02c8ki\u025bf]).\nAs for the origin and definition of the name \"Rus\" there is no consensus among researchers. Several versions exist:\nUkrainian historians generally adhere to anti-Norman opinion, while not denying the contribution Varangians in the process of formation of Rus state system. Russ, or The Rus Land in their opinion means:\nCossackian State.\nAt the end of the 15th century, the groups of warriors who called themselves Cossacks appeared on the territory between the borders of Lithuania, Muscovy and the Crimea, in the \"wild steppes\" of Zaporizhia. From the 16th century the Sich became their military centre. Zaporizhian Cossacks participated in the wars on the side of the Commonwealth: the Livonian War (1558-1583), the Polish-Muscovite War (1605-1618), Khotyn war (1620-1621), and Smolensk war (1632-1634). Cossacks also organized their own campaigns in Moldavia, Muscovy, and Crimea, on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria and in Asia Minor for looting. They willingly became mercenaries, particularly during the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648).\nDue to the legal and social oppression of the nobility Cossacks repeatedly revolted. The largest rebellions were raised under the guidance of: Kosynskiy (1591-1593), Nalyvaiko (1594-1596), Zhmaylo (1625), Fedorovych (1630), Sulima (1635), Pavlyuk (1637) and Ostryanin (1638). Cossacks again and again defended the rights of the Ukrainian population in the Commonwealth who experienced religious and national oppression regularly.\nFor the conflict in the 1850s see Crimean War.\n20th century.\nIn 1917 an independent Ukrainian People's Republic was established. The Red Army captured it and made it into the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.\nSoviet Russia in the 1920s encouraged the Ukrainian language and Ukrainian culture. In the 1930s this policy changed to making the Ukrainians into Russians. There were mass repressions of Ukrainian poets, historians and linguists. As in other parts of the Soviet Union millions of people starved to death in 1932 and 1933.\nDuring the first years of World War II Ukrainian nationalists collaborated with Nazis against Soviet Union hoping to reestablish Ukrainian independence or to get autonomy under the authority of Germany. Nationalists took part in mass murders of Jews, Roma people and other victims of Nazi regime. However hopes of independence was ruined and Ukrainian nationalists created Ukrainian Insurgent Army which fought against Nazi Germany but against the Soviet Union (mainly Soviet partisans) for the most part. They failed to get independence. Most Ukrainians fought on the side of the Soviet Union and participated in the liberation of Ukraine from Nazi Germany.\nIn 1986, the fourth reactor at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant exploded as a result of an improper test. The accident contaminated large portions of northern Ukraine and southern Belarus with uranium, plutonium, and radioactive isotopes. It was one of only two INES level 7 accidents (the worst level) in the history of nuclear power, the other being the Fukushima nuclear disaster in Japan.\nUnder the second Soviet occupation repressions against Ukrainian nationalists continued and lasted till dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.\nIn the Soviet epoch Ukraine was renamed to so-called a \"Soviet Socialist Republic\" incorporated into Soviet Union.\nIndependence day \u2014 24 August 1991\nModern independence.\nPresident elections: 1 December 1991, July 1994, October-November 1999, October-December 2004, January 2010\nParliament elections: March 1994, March 1998, March 2002, March 2006, September 2007 (prematurely), October 2012\nConstitution of Ukraine was adopted by Parliament (Verkhovna Rada) 28 July 1996 with changes 8 December 2004.\nThe political demonstrations in autumn-winter 2004 after the Presidential elections gathered millions of people all over the country. On November 26, 2004, Victor Yuschenko lost the Ukrainian presidential election (Viktor Yanukovych was declared winner). However, Yuschenko and his followers argued that the election had been corrupted. They argued that the election results had been falsified by the Ukrainian government, in support of the opposing candidate Victor Yanukovych. They organized political demonstrations in autumn-winter 2004 that gathered millions of people all over the country. They called the demonstrations \"The Orange Revolution\" (). Former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko was an important ally of Victor Yuschenko during the demonstrations. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine ordered a second round of elections, which Yuschenko won.\nBig pro-European Union protests called Euromaidan () began in November 2013 and made the President go away in February.\nIn March 2014, Russia occupied Crimea, made a pseudo-referendum which proclaimed the Crimea independence and annexed it. Most countries did not recognize the referendum. The EU, OSCE, USA and Ukraine demanded that Crimea be returned. Several countries sought to use economic sanctions to punish Russia's leaders for this.\nIn April, 2014 Ukraine military attack against people in Donbass in eastern Ukraine, which has many Russian-speaking people. This began a war to control Donbass.\nIn 2016, the New Safe Confinement was built to cover the remains of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant and prevent radiation from escaping."}
{"id": "3465", "revid": "1150477", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3465", "title": "Liechtenstein", "text": "Liechtenstein is a country in Western Europe. It is the sixth smallest country in the world and, with Uzbekistan, one of only two doubly landlocked countries. This means that it is landlocked by a landlocked country. Liechtenstein is between Austria and Switzerland.\nLiechtenstein was linked with Austria until the end of World War I, after which it became linked with Switzerland in a customs union.\nThe official language in Liechtenstein is German.\nThe capital of Liechtenstein is Vaduz, a very small town of 5,000 people. Liechtenstein is famous for its many private banks."}
{"id": "3466", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3466", "title": "Portugal", "text": "Portugal is a country in Southern Europe on the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal is the westernmost country of Europe and part of the Mediterranean. It is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the west and south and by Spain to the north and east. It has been a member of the European Union since 1986. It was under a dictatorship between 1926 and 1974. It has since prospered but was hit hard by the 2007-2008 recession.\nIt has a football team and won the Eurovision Song Contest 2017 and hosted the event in 2018.\nIt once had an empire and was a powerful maritime nation from 1500s\u20131800s, the 10th-largest empire with a maximum land area of 10.4 million km\u00b2 which included Brazil, Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, East Timore, S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, Portuguese Ceylon (Sri Lanka) and even Macau in China (until 2002).\nThree groups of islands in the Atlantic Ocean are also part of Portugal: the Azores (\"A\u00e7ores\"), Madeira and the Savage Isles (\"Ilhas Selvagens\"). The Savage Isles are a small group of uninhabited islands, administered by Madeira.\nPortugal claims that Oliven\u00e7a is also part of its territory, but it is controlled by Spain.\nIt is a popular holiday destination but is sometimes overlooked in favour of larger countries like France, Spain and Italy. The Algarve region in the south and capital Lisbon are the most popular.\nHistory.\nPortugal became its own kingdom in 1139 but was not officially recognized until 1143. Portugal has had links with England since the 1100s via a treaty. The border with Spain has been almost the same since the 13th century. Fishing and trade with other countries are important here.\nPortugal was important in world exploration for two reasons. Henry the Navigator, a prince from Portugal, was very interested in exploration. Inventions in navigation led to a bigger knowledge of geography.\nThis world exploration began the Portuguese Empire. Portugal was a world power during the 15th and 16th centuries. It tried to colonize Canada in the 16th century. However, it lost a lot of money soon after this. Portugal and Spain were in the Iberian Union from 1580 to 1640. The city of Lisbon was destroyed in an earthquake in 1755. The country was occupied during the Napoleonic Wars. It lost its largest colony, Brazil, in 1822.\nIn 1910, Portugal became a Republic, and in 1926, a military group took control of the country from the Portuguese 1st Republic. This began a time of rule by authoritarian governments. During World War II they were neutral but friendly to Britain. In 1974 a peaceful left-wing army coup, called the \"Carnation Revolution\", happened. The coup changed how the country was run.\nThe next year, Portugal allowed its colonies in Africa to be on their own: Mozambique, Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde and S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe.\nEast Timor in Asia declared itself independent from Portugal on 28 November 1975, and was invaded and occupied by Indonesian forces nine days later.\nPortugal went into the European Union in 1986. Another Asian colony, Macau, became part of China\nThe main language of Portugal is Portuguese.\nSome famous Portuguese people are D. Afonso Henriques, Henry the Navigator, Bartolomeu Dias, Vasco da Gama, Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral, Ferdinand Magellan, Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es, Fernando Pessoa, Am\u00e1lia Rodrigues, \u00c1lvaro Siza Vieira, Eduardo Souto de Moura.\nLu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es wrote the national poem of Portugal. It is called \"Os Lus\u00edadas\" and was written in 1572."}
{"id": "3467", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3467", "title": "Slovakia", "text": "Slovakia (Slovak: \"Slovensko\") (Official name The Slovak Republic, \"Slovensk\u00e1 republika\") is a country with no access to the ocean in Central Europe. It is bordered by Austria in the southwest, Hungary in the south, Ukraine in the east, Poland in the north and Czech Republic in the northwest. Its capital city is Bratislava, the only capital of the world that borders with other two countries. Other main cities are Ko\u0161ice, Pre\u0161ov, \u017dilina, Bansk\u00e1 Bystrica, Tren\u010d\u00edn, Nitra and Trnava. Slovakia has been a member of the European Union since 2004 and its official currency is the Euro.\nHistory.\nThe Celts started to settle since 450\u00a0BC. The coins named \"Biatec\" represent the first use of writing in Slovakia. At the turn of millenniums, many different Germanic tribes like Quadi and Marcomanni started to overtake the area. The Roman Empire established many outposts along the Danube river. They even fought Germanic tribes, with the most northern presence being in Tren\u010d\u00edn (\"Laugaritio\"), during the Marcomannic Wars.\nGreat Moravia was at first in constant quarrels with the Eastern Francia, and at the beginning of the 10th century, with the Magyars who arrived from Asia. The Magyars conquered Great Moravia in 906, and established the Hungarian Principality, resulting later in the creation of the Kingdom of Hungary in year 1000. Slovaks continued to live in the north, while most Hungarians were in the south. \nA huge population loss resulted from the Mongol invasions in 1241. The Hungarian kings started to invite other settlers, for example Germans in the 13th century, and many others started to arrive in the kingdom, Vlachs from Romania in the 14th century and Jews.\nIn the 16th century the Ottoman Empire occupied the southern part of the kingdom including the two most important towns, Buda (capital) and Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r (coronation capital). Many Hungarian nobles moved to Slovakia and the king moved to Bratislava (\"Pressburg\", \"Pozsony\" at that time). The wars against the Ottomans and an uprising against the Habsburgs caused much destruction. After the Ottomans started to retreat back from Hungary, Bratislava continued to be capital until 1848, when it was moved back to Budapest.\nThe creation of a dual monarchy, Austria-Hungary, enabled the Hungarian government to initiate a policy of suppressing the teaching of languages other than the Hungarian language in state schools. The official use of other languages than Hungarian was also discouraged. During this time, a nationalist movement arose among Slovakians. A part of this movement joined forces with a part of the Czech nationalist movement. During World War I, this movement convinced the future victorious powers to recognise a new state of Czechoslovakia after the war.\nThe territory of today's Slovakia was a part of Czechoslovakia from 1918 to 1938 and again from 1945 until 1989. Czechoslovakia was one of the states which came into existence after the breakup of Austria-Hungary at end of World War I in 1918. Czechoslovakia split up in 1939, when Slovakia, under Hitler's influence and pressure, declared independence and became an independent state. The state existed during World War II. It was a one-party totalitarian state which was a puppet ally of Nazi Germany. Under the regime, the state fought in the war on the side of Nazi Germany and deported about 70,000 of its Jewish citizens to Nazi extermination camps as part of the Holocaust.\nThe territory of Czechoslovakia was liberated by the Soviet Union at the end of World War II in 1945. After the liberation, Czechoslovakia was reunified and briefly existed as a democratic country. The Communist Party successfully performed a state coup in 1948 and ruled Czechoslovakia as a totalitarian one-party state which was a satellite of the Soviet Union. In 1989, the one-party rule of the Communist Party was overthrown during the Velvet Revolution, which was a series of large and peaceful demonstrations by the citizens in the streets.\nCzechoslovakia again became a democratic country. However, it split up into two independent countries (Slovakia and Czech Republic) on January 1, 1993 in what became known as the Velvet Divorce. Slovakia has been a member of the European Union since May 1, 2004.\nGeography.\nSlovakia is landlocked. It is noted primarily for its mountainous nature, with the Carpathian Mountains being in the north and various lowlands mostly in the south. The highest mountain range are the Tatra mountains with the highest peak, the Gerlachov Peak (Slovak: \"Gerlachovsk\u00fd \u0161t\u00edt\"; 2,654\u00a0m). Major Slovak rivers besides the Danube are the V\u00e1h and Hron.\nAt low altitudes, Slovakia's climate is humid continental (\"Dfb\" in the Koeppen climate classification, with warm summers and cloudy, cold and humid winters. At high altitudes it is subarctic and alpine.\nDemographics.\nAbout 5.5 million people live in Slovakia. Most people are Slovak (86%), but in southern regions of Slovakia live Hungarians (10%), with some municipalities even being with the Hungarian majority (for example, Kom\u00e1rno or Dunajsk\u00e1 Streda), Ruthenian or Ukrainian are spoken in the northeast. A minority Roma population speak versions of the Romany language and are scattered mainly in the east.\nThe Slovak constitution guarantees a freedom of religion. The majority of Slovaks are Roman Catholics (69%), the next are the atheists (13%). Other religions include Lutheranism, Greek Orthodox and Calvinism. There are about 5,000 Muslims in Slovakia and 2,000 Jews.\nAdministrative division.\nThere are currently 8 regions of Slovakia:\nThese are further divided into many districts. There are currently 79 districts of Slovakia."}
{"id": "3468", "revid": "7681512", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3468", "title": "Slovenia", "text": "Slovenia is a country in Southern Europe. The capital and largest city of Slovenia is Ljubljana. Its major language is Slovenian. Its current population is about 2.0 million. Slovenia's leading exports are manufactured goods and aluminium. It is a parliamentary republic It is a member of the European Union and NATO. The economy of Slovenia is small, open, and export-oriented.\nHistory.\nA very long time ago, Illyrian and Celtics tribes lived in Slovenia. In the 1st century BC, Slovenia was ruled by the Romans. In the sixth century AD, Slavs lived there. Slovenia was ruled by Austria from 1335 until 1918. In 1918 it became a part of Yugoslavia. During World War II, Italy, Hungary and Germany took parts of the country but in 1945 it became part of Yugoslavia again.\nIn June 1991, following a 10-day war, Slovenia became an independent country.\nCurrently it is considered the most advanced country from what is called \"Ex-Yugoslavia.\" It is also a member of the European Union."}
{"id": "3470", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3470", "title": "Oldham Cricket Club", "text": "Oldham Cricket Club are a cricket team which currently plays in the Central Lancashire League.\nThe ground that the club plays at is called \"The Pollards\"."}
{"id": "3471", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3471", "title": "Denarius", "text": "The denarius was a small silver coin used by the Roman Empire and Roman Republic. The denarius weighed about 3 to 4.5 grams. It was the main coin of Ancient Rome. It became the most common coin produced for circulation but was slowly debased in weight and silver content. The coin was then sometimes made of copper and painted silver in color. During the Empire the front side usually had a picture of the emperor on it.\nThe denarius was introduced in 211 BC, and was last made in 275 AD. By then it was made of bronze."}
{"id": "3472", "revid": "983938", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3472", "title": "Jackknife", "text": "A jackknife is a type of knife. It has a blade that folds into the handle. It is also a dive where the body is bent and then straightened before entering the water and when a person backs up in their vehicle with a trailer attached and it accidentally folds."}
{"id": "3473", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3473", "title": "Luffa", "text": "A luffa (also spelled loofah or loofa) is a long thin dried inner part of the fruit of a tropical plant related to the cucumber . It is often used as a sponge for washing the body. Before it gets ripe, it is also a good vegetable. It also comes from dried corn on the cob stems."}
{"id": "3474", "revid": "656019", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3474", "title": "Kimono", "text": "Kimono are traditional Japanese style clothes. \"Kimono\" meant \"something you wear\" originally. About a century ago, most people in Japan wore the kimono every day. Now, people wear other clothing in Japan most of the time. However, they still wear the kimono for special occasions, such as formal ceremonies, but also for fun and fashion.\nA kimono is a robe shaped like a \"T\". Normal kimonos reach to the ankles, and have long sleeves. The sleeves of some kimono for women also reach to the ankles, but most kimono sleeves reach to the hips.\nHistory.\nJapanese people have been wearing garments that looked like the kimono for hundreds of years. It was during the Heian period that many Japanese people started using the kimono and wore some clothing that were like a kimono. \nOriginally, it was the Chinese visitors that wore the kimono. Later, the Japanese decided to use the kimono too. These clothes had long, triangle-shaped sleeves and were wrapped over the body. They were worn with a jacket and a skirt or trousers on top.\nA few centuries later in the Heian period, these clothes changed to look more like a modern kimono. The garment looked more like a rectangle, and the sleeves were square instead of triangle-shaped.\nCommon people wore a piece of clothing called a \"kosode\", which means \"short sleeve\". This garment looked like a modern kimono, with a wider body and smaller sleeves. The overlap at the front of the robe was longer, the collar was wider, and the robe was shorter as well.\nNoble people also wore the \"kosode\", but they wore several layers on top of it. Noble women wore clothing called \"j\u016bni hitoe\", which means \"twelve layers\", though the number of layered robes varied. These robes were wider, longer and had larger sleeves than the \"kosode\" that the common people wore, and could weigh up to 20kg in total. Noblemen wore round-necked jackets with wide, long sleeves and \"hakama\" trousers. They would wear this with a small cap, which was usually black in colour.\nOver time, wearing a lot of clothes became unfashionable. The government created laws to stop people from wearing lots of robes at once, and starting with the Muromachi period, women and men began to wear the \"kosode\" by itself or with two or three layers, with a small, thin belt called an obi, and for women, red \"hakama\" trousers. However, ceremonial clothing in the Imperial Court still looked like clothing from previous centuries, and even today, the new Emperor and Empress of Japan are coronated in Heian period clothing.\nDuring the Genroku period, the common people began to get richer, especially the merchants. This led to people wearing expensive and beautiful \"kosode\", even if they were not nobility. People began to experiment with different ways to decorate their clothing, such as embroidery, and experimented with ways of dyeing their clothing. \nThis made them look like noble people, so the government introduced laws against commoners wearing certain things to prevent it. However, people did not want to give up their beautiful clothes, and instead found different ways of wearing them; a man, for instance, might wear a \"haori\" jacket made out of wool in a plain, boring colour, but line it with a fancy silk fabric. \nThis way of thinking about clothing and appearances became known as an aesthetic idea called \"iki\", which is still important to the way people wear kimono today.\nOver time, the obi got wider and longer, especially for women. Because of this, the sleeves of the \"kosode\" were no longer sewn to the body entirely, and were instead only attached at the shoulder on \"kosode\" for women. \nSleeves also got longer for young women, as did the length of the \"kosode\", which started to be called the kimono sometime in the Edo period. The kimono would trail behind someone indoors, but had to be pulled up when going out so it would not become dirty. Women started tucking the extra length of their kimono into a hip fold, which became known as the \"ohashori\". Kimono are still worn by women today with the \"ohashori\".\nOver time, very wide obi and very long kimono fell out of fashion. During World War Two, longer kimono sleeves were seen as very wasteful, and sleeves on kimono were usually shortened, sometimes a lot. This new sleeve length lasted, and modern kimono for women are still shorter than they were before the war. Older kimono, especially from the Taish\u014d period, still have these longer sleeves sometimes.\nToday, more women wear the kimono than men. Men wear kimono most often at weddings and Japanese tea ceremonies. \nMen and women's kimono.\nKimono are made in different sizes for different people, and are made in different lengths for men and women. Men and women also wear kimono with different sleeves.\nKimono for women are much longer than kimono for men, and women fold the kimono at the waist in a tuck to make them the right size. The right length for a woman's kimono is usually the same as her height, though people who are very tall can struggle to find kimono that fits them. \nThe sleeves on a woman's kimono are not sewn to the body all the way down, and are open at the back. Part of the body of the kimono is open as well. The sleeves on a woman's kimono are longer than the sleeves on a man's kimono, and sometimes reach the ankle on kimono for young women. The curve at the edge of the sleeves is very round, especially on kimono for young women and girls.\nKimono for men do not need to be folded at the hip, and so do not have any extra length. The sleeves are shorter, and are attached almost all the way down to the body. The back of the sleeves is sewn shut, and the body is also sewn shut. The curve at the edge of the sleeve is not as round.\nKimono for men are usually one solid colour, but might have a very small geometric design. Kimono for women can be one solid colour, have a small design, or be decorated in larger, colourful patterns. More colourful kimono are usually worn by young women. Sometimes, these designs are only worn in certain seasons of the year.\nPeople who are very tall or very heavy can struggle to find a kimono that fits them, and sometimes have kimonos made for them instead.\nTypes of kimono.\nKimonos come in different types for different occasions, and both men and women have formal and casual kimono. Formal kimono have a number of crests on them, called \"kamon\" or \"mon\". These are placed on the front of the shoulders, the back of the sleeves, and the centre of the back. Kimono with crests have either one, three, or five crests on them - the crest on the centre back, the centre back and the sleeves, or the centre back, the sleeves and the shoulders.\nThe most formal kimono have all five of these crests on them. The least-formal formal kimono have just one. These crests can be outlined or coloured in fully in white, with \"kamon\" that are just an outline being the least formal. \nKimono are usually made of silk, but there are cotton, polyester, hemp and linen kimono as well. Some kimono are also made of wool, or rayon. Formal kimono are always made out of fine silk, and are usually sewn by hand. However, not all silk kimono are formal kimono, and some types of silk, such as pongee (known as \"tsumugi\") are only ever worn to casual occasions.\nThe most informal type of kimono is the \"yukata\", worn in summer to festivals and in bath houses and inns by both men and women. They are not lined, are always made of cotton, and are worn with thin, brightly-coloured obi. \nFor formal occasions, men wear fine silk kimono with \"haori\" (a kimono jacket) and \"hakama\" (loose-fitting trousers). The \"hakama\" are usually striped in white and black, and the kimono and the \"haori\" will match in colour.\nWomen have a number of different types of kimono for different formal occasions. The designs on the kimono, how they are put onto the kimono, and where they are placed on the kimono all change how formal the finished outfit is. In order of formality, these are:\nAccessories.\nPeople wear a wide belt called an obi with their kimono. Obi are also colorful, and are very long. Some types of obi are not worn anymore, as they are too difficult to wear and put on. The \"maru\" obi is an example of a type of obi not worn any more. The \"fukuro\" obi replaced it, as it was less wide and easier to wear.\nCost.\nKimonos can be very expensive, for example, the Furisode is very expensive to get. The obi belts can be very expensive too. The kimono most people have are not so expensive. Some people make their own kimono, or they buy them second-hand.\nOther kimonos.\nPeople who play some sports like kendo also wear the kimono. These are tough, thick and short, not like the typical women's kimono. They are usually called \"do-gi\".\nWearing the kimono.\nMost Japanese people do not know how to put on a kimono by themselves as it is very different from other clothing. Formal kimono for women can be very difficult to put on by yourself. Some people work as \"kimono dressers\". They help people to put on their kimono. \nIn Japan, people can take classes about wearing the kimono, and to learn about how to choose a kimono and how to tie the obi."}
{"id": "3475", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3475", "title": "Sconce", "text": "A sconce is a holder for candles or electric lights that is fixed on a wall. Most of the time, sconces are also meant to make the place look more beautiful."}
{"id": "3476", "revid": "7893079", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3476", "title": "Culture", "text": "Culture is a word for the 'way of life' of groups of people, meaning the way they do things. Different groups may have different cultures. A culture is passed on to the next generation by learning, whereas genetics are passed on by heredity. Culture is seen in people's writing, religion, music, clothes, cooking and in what they do. \nThe concept of culture is very complicated, and the word has many meanings. The word 'culture' is most commonly used in three ways.\nMost broadly, 'culture' includes all human phenomena which are not purely results of human genetics. The discipline which investigates cultures is called anthropology, though many other disciplines play a part.\nNational cultures.\nCultures are what making the country unique and interesting. Each country has different cultural activities and cultural rituals. Culture includes material goods, the things the people use and produce. Culture is also the beliefs and values of the people and the ways they think about and understand the world and their own lives.\nDifferent countries have different cultures. For example, some older Japanese people wear kimonos, arrange flowers in vases, and have tea ceremonies. Some countries oppose some things in their culture, like discrimination or religion.\nRegional or non-regional cultures.\nCulture can also vary within a region, society or sub group. A workplace may have a specific culture that sets it apart from similar workplaces. A region of a country may have a different culture than the rest of the country. For example, in a large country like China or Canada a region may have a distinctive way of talking, different types of music, and different types of dances. \nA group who acts or speaks differently may be said to be, or have, a subculture.\nEthnic groups such as the Romani people in Europe have a distinct culture.\nCompany cultures.\nCompanies or other organizations (groups of people) can have a separate culture. Japanese manufacturing companies often have a different culture to Western companies; the workday starts with exercise, and the workers are very loyal to the company. \nCompanies in the high-technology sector often have a different culture than other companies. Software and computer companies sometimes allow employees to play games during the workday, or take time off work to relax, because these companies believe that this will help the workers to think better.\nAnthropology.\n\"Anthropology\" is studying human beings and how they relate to each other. An \"anthropologist\" is a person who studies anthropology. Anthropologists study how culture shapes people and their lives. Cultures constantly change as people move and communicate with new groups of people. \nFor example, immigrants (people who move from one country to another) may keep some of their customs and traditions from their old country. By keeping their culture in this way, they bring pieces of their culture to a new place where others begin to experience it."}
{"id": "3477", "revid": "145452", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3477", "title": "Houseplant", "text": "A houseplant is any kind of decorative plant. People grow them indoors, usually in a house, where these plants gets their name."}
{"id": "3478", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3478", "title": "Waxed paper", "text": "Waxed paper (or wax paper) is a type of paper which has been coated on both sides with wax. This gives it a translucent look. It is used for wrapping food because grease, oil, and water cannot pass through it. It is also used to line food containers because many kinds of food which would stick to normal paper will not stick to wax paper. Many kinds of dry foods were once stored in wax paper because of its resistance to water. Wax paper has been replaced by plastic wrap for most purposes.\nUses.\nSafety razor blades are traditionally wrapped in wax paper to make holding them less dangerous. Wax paper can also be used to make paper boats that can be used for a long time without getting wet because of its high resistance to water.\nWax paper is also used to stick pieces of pattern to fabric while cutting it. \nIn photography, wax paper can be used as a light diffuser.\nWax paper is commonly used in cooking because it does not sticky foods cannot stick to it. It is also used in wrapping food. It is also used in arts and crafts."}
{"id": "3479", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3479", "title": "Japanese tea ceremony", "text": "The Japanese tea ceremony (called cha-no-yu, chado, or sado) is a special way of making green tea (matcha \u62b9\u8336). It is called the Way of Tea. It is a Japanese cultural activity involving the ceremonial preparation and presentation of matcha, powdered tea. People who study the tea ceremony have to learn about different kinds of tea. They also have to learn about kimono (Japanese clothes), flowers, and many other things. It takes much practice to learn the tea ceremony. \nHistory.\nTea came to Japan from China in about 900 CE. Tea became very popular in Japan, and Japanese people started to grow tea in Japan.\nIn the 12th century, \"matcha\" (green tea powder), became popular. This tea comes from the same plant as black tea. \nBy the 16th century, all people in Japan, rich people and poor people, liked drinking tea. A man called Sen no Rikyu started teaching the ceremony. Many years have passed, but people still make tea the same way that Sen no Rikyu taught. Many schools of Japanese tea ceremony exist now (omote-senke, ura-senke, etc.), and each school teaches in a slightly different way.\nMaterials needed.\nPeople need many different things for a tea ceremony:\nTea ceremony.\nPeople do the tea ceremony in a special tea room or a special building called a \"cha-shitsu\". Most people wear kimonos.\nWhen people go into the tea room they take off their shoes and sit on special floor mat called a tatami.\nCha-shitsu often are very small. The guests (the people who go to the tea ceremony) sometimes eat food and drink special Japanese wine called sake. Before they drink the matcha (green tea) they eat something sweet. \nThe host (the person who does the tea ceremony) symbolically purifies the tea bowl and the other tea things. Then he or she puts some green tea powder into the tea bowl. The host mixes the tea with hot water. He or she mixes it with a whisk. The guests drink tea from the bowl.\nWhen everyone has finished drinking tea, the host cleans everything and puts them away. Then the guests leave.\nA tea ceremony can take from about twenty minutes to about four hours."}
{"id": "3485", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3485", "title": "Sideboard", "text": "A sideboard is a piece of furniture. It is often placed in a dining room with a long table and cupboard below to hold dishes, glasses, and other things."}
{"id": "3486", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3486", "title": "Movie", "text": "A movie, or film, is a type of visual communication which uses moving pictures and sound to tell stories or teach people something. Most people watch (view) movies as a type of entertainment or a way to have fun. For some people, fun movies can mean movies that make them laugh, while for others it can mean movies that make them cry, or feel afraid.\nOverview.\nMost movies are made so that they can be shown on screen in Cinemas and at home. Movies are shown in Cinemas for a period of a few weeks or months, they may be marketed through several other medias. They are shown on pay television or cable television, and sold or rented on DVD disks or videocassette tapes, so that people can watch the movies at home. You can also download or stream movies. Older movies are shown on television broadcasting stations.\nA movie camera or video camera takes pictures very quickly, usually at 24 or 25 pictures (frames) every second. When a movie projector, a computer, or a television shows the pictures at that rate, it looks like the things shown in the set of pictures are really moving. Sound is either recorded at the same time, or added later. The sounds in a movie usually include the sounds of people talking (which is called dialogue), music (which is called the \"soundtrack\"), and sound effects, the sounds of activities that are happening in the movie (such as doors opening or guns being fired). In the 20th century the camera used photographic film. The product is still often called a \"film\" even though there usually is no film.\nHow are they made?\nA screenwriter writes a script, which is the story of the movie with dialogue and things that the actors will say and do. A producer hires people to work on the movie and gets all of the money that will be needed to pay for the actors and the equipment. Producers usually get the money by borrowing it from a bank or by getting investors to lend money to the movie production. Some producers work for a movie studio; other producers are independent (they do not work for a movie studio).\nActors and directors read scripts to find out what to say and what to do. The actors memorize the words from the script that they will say in the movie, and learn the actions that the script tells them to do. Then, the director tells the actors what to do and a cameraman takes motion pictures of them with a motion picture camera.\nWhen filming has finished, an editor puts the moving pictures together in a way that tells the whole story within a set amount of time. Audio engineers and sound engineers record music and singing and join it with the moving pictures. When the movie is done, many copies of the movie are made by movie labs and put onto film reels. Then the reels are sent to cinemas. An electric machine called a projector shines a very bright light through the film, and people sitting in a dark room see it on a big screen.\nGenres.\nA genre is a word for a type of movie or a style of movie. Movies can be fictional (made up), or documentary (showing 'real life'), or a mix of the two. Although hundreds of movies are made every year, there are very few that do not follow a small number of set plots, or stories. Some movies mix together two or more genres.\nBusiness of making movies.\nMost movies lose money but some make profits in the hundreds of millions, be they dollars, euro or pounds. In India movies have become an enormous part of the economy. The industry has always been dominated by a few major movie studios like MGM/UA, Warner Bros., Columbia, Lucasfilm, Paramount or Disney. \nElements.\nThere are many large companies that provide all of the services needed to make movies, such as special effects, lighting, set building. Many of these employees belong to trade unions who say how much their members must be paid. A huge number of smaller companies also offer services, such as music studios (which record the music for original movie sound tracks) and CGI computer animation. \nDistribution.\nFinally there are movie distribution companies (which send movies around the world or around a country), and advertising companies who let people know about the movie and promote it (try to make people want to see the movie).\nMovies with famous stars and large budgets (lots of money), are designed to have a wide appeal, so that hopefully millions of people will pay to see them. These most expensive movies are called blockbusters. \nSpecial effects can add a huge amount to the cost of a movie, especially the newest CGI effects, but people have come to expect them and every blockbuster movie tries to outdo the last. Even in 2008, some movies cost up to $200 million to make. \nVery successful movies can make many times that amount in profit, and that's why the studios keep producing them. This kind of movie will have a lot of promotion through television advertising, billboards and internet sites. \nBlockbuster.\nIn blockbuster movies, there is usually a happy ending, in which all of the problems in the plot (story) are figured out or fixed and almost everyone (except the baddie) live happily ever after. Some movies have been so successful that the studios keep releasing more and more sequels, or movies with the same characters and basic plots.\nIndie films.\nAt the opposite end of the scale to the blockbuster, there is the independent, art, or Indie movie. These are usually made by small movie companies, or even just a small group of people that do not have much money. An example is The Blair Witch Project, which cost only about $60,000, but which has so far taken perhaps $200 million in ticket and DVD sales. Movies like this are very unusual and usually become popular 'underground' (word of mouth advertising), so that they become cult, or popular but not mainstream. \nIndependent movies often tell more creative or unusual (strange) stories, or may have sad endings that do not appeal to the big studios, because they can not be sure how the public will react to them. They rarely make a lot of money, but if they are successful, the big studios will quickly try to get the people involved to sign a contract with them, by offering them a lot of money to make another movie. Often the new movie, with its big budget and its stars will be less successful than the first."}
{"id": "3487", "revid": "145452", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3487", "title": "Holland", "text": "Holland is the name of a region in the western part of the Netherlands. Holland was a county of the Holy Roman Empire and later the leading province of the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands (1581\u20131795).\nToday, there is no country called \"Holland\". There are two provinces called \"Holland\" in the Netherlands: North Holland () and South Holland (). Those provinces were created in 1840. The earlier country and province of Holland used to be bigger, but some parts of that province were given to other provinces during the French occupation (1795-1813). For example, Willemstad became part of North Brabant, the islands of Vlieland and Terschelling were given to Friesland, and the island of Urk to Overijssel. But for a short time during that period (1806\u20131810), there \"was\" a country called \"Holland\", the Kingdom of Holland, which was in the central and northern Netherlands and East Friesland in Germany.\nMany people use the name \"Holland\" to refer to all of the Netherlands, including the other ten provinces. That is not correct and is like calling the United Kingdom, \"England\" or \"Great Britain\". Some Dutch people who do not live in Holland do not like it when people call the entire country Holland. But they don't mind using \"Holland\" when you mean the Dutch national football team, which they are used to calling \"Holland\"."}
{"id": "3488", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3488", "title": "The Netherlands", "text": ""}
{"id": "3489", "revid": "7756852", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3489", "title": "Isotope", "text": "The atoms of a chemical element can exist in different types that have very similar behavior, but weigh different amounts. These are called isotopes of the element. Atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, but different isotopes have different numbers of neutrons. Different isotopes of the same element have different masses because they have a different number of neutrons. Mass is the word for how much substance (or matter) something has. Things with different masses also have different weights. \nSome isotopes are not stable so they change to another isotope or element by radioactive decay. These are called radioactive isotopes. Others are not radioactive. These are called stable isotopes. \nAtoms of the same element have the same number of protons, which is called the atomic number. Different isotopes of an element have different numbers of neutrons. As a result, they also have different mass numbers, which is the number of protons plus the number of neutrons. An isotope is usually named by giving the element and the mass number. For example, the symbol for carbon is C and all carbon atoms have 6 protons. The most common isotope of carbon also has 6 neutrons, giving a mass number of 12, and it is written carbon-12 or 12C. The isotope of carbon that has 8 neutrons is written carbon-14 or 14C.\nThe word \"isotope\", meaning \"at the same place\", comes from the fact that isotopes of the same element are at the same place on the periodic table.\nChemical properties.\nIn any neutral atom, the number of electrons is the same as the number of protons. As a result, isotopes of the same element also have the same number of electrons and the same electronic structure. The way an atom acts is decided by its electronic structure, so isotopes of the same element have almost the same chemical behavior, such as the molecules it can form. It is very difficult to separate the isotopes of an element from a mixture of different isotopes because of how similar this behavior is.\nHeavier isotopes react chemically more slowly than lighter isotopes of the same element. This \"mass effect\" is large for protium (1H) and deuterium (2H), because deuterium has twice the mass of protium. For heavier elements, the relative atomic weight ratio between isotopes is much less, so the mass effect is usually small.\nStability.\nSome isotopes are not stable so they change to a different isotope or element by radioactive decay. These are called unstable isotopes, or radioactive isotopes. The average time it takes an isotope to decay is called the half-life. Other isotopes do not decay so they are not radioactive. They are called stable isotopes. \nEvery atom has an atomic nucleus, which is made from protons and neutrons that are held together by the nuclear force. Because protons have positive electrical charge, they repel each other. Neutrons are neutral and they stabilize the nucleus. The neutrons hold the protons slightly apart. This reduces the electrostatic repulsion between the protons, so the nuclear force can hold the protons and neutrons together. One or more neutrons are necessary for two or more protons to bind into a nucleus. As the number of protons increases, so does the number of neutrons needed to have a stable nucleus.\nSome elements only have a single isotope that is stable. For example, fluorine-19 (19F) is the only stable isotope of fluorine. The other isotopes of fluorine decay rapidly so they are not found in nature. Other elements have many stable isotopes. For example, xenon has seven stable isotopes. It also has two isotopes that decay very slowly that are found in nature. The largest number of stable isotopes for any element is ten, for the element tin. Some elements do not have any stable isotopes, such as curium. These only exist on Earth because they are created in nuclear reactors, nuclear explosions, or particle accelerators.\nSome unstable isotopes exist naturally on Earth because they have a very long half-life. For example, uranium-238 has a half-life of 4468 million years. The half life of radium-226 is only 1600 years, and it is found in nature because it is constantly forming from the decay of uranium-238.\nHydrogen has three common isotopes. The most common isotope of hydrogen is called protium (1H), which has one proton and no neutrons. A hydrogen atom that has a proton and a neutron (atomic mass of 2) is called deuterium (2H). Hydrogen with one proton and two neutrons (atomic mass of 3) is called tritium (3H). Protium and deuterium are stable isotopes, while tritium is a radioactive isotope.\nThe heaviest elements in the periodic table are all radioactive. All of the isotopes of radon, thorium, and uranium are radioactive, since they are very heavy. This is because the nuclear forces inside the nucleus of the atom cannot hold together all the protons and neutrons."}
{"id": "3490", "revid": "6938127", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3490", "title": "Crushing by elephant", "text": "In the past, many rulers in south and southeast Asia had people crushed by elephants as a death penalty. This was common for more than 4000 years. The Romans and Carthaginians also sometimes did this.\nThe elephant would step upon the head of the condemned, the one commanded to die. Usually, handlers trained the elephant to put its large foot gently on the person's head. At this point, witnesses looked under the elephant's foot to make sure the prisoner was the one who committed the crime. Often, the condemned would scream and beg the witnesses to say it was not him. If a witness stated this was not the criminal, they would probably commit perjury. Perjury means lying at a trial. In those days rulers could punish perjury with death. Few witnesses denied the condemned was the criminal, because then the elephant may crush them instead. Then the mahout, or elephant driver, gave the order, and the elephant would push down with its weight. The skull broke and the foot crushed the head flat.\nSometimes, the elephant would drag the condemned through streets before the crushing. Some elephants crushed the arms and legs first, to increase the pain.\nLocations.\nMost rajahs, Indian rulers, kept elephants for death by crushing. The public could often see the deaths; this was the rulers' warning not to commit a crime. Many of the elephants were very large, weighing more than nine tons. Rulers wanted crushing by elephant to be bloody and gross. Some rulers in history condemned children, too. \nMany rulers in South Asia used elephants as executioners, ones who put the condemned to death. One nonreligious Mogul Emperor, Akbar (1547-1605), used his favorite elephant as a judge, too. Akbar ruled in the city of Agra from 1570-1585. He believed that his favorite elephant could know who was guilty. He put thousands of people to death this way. Even when the crimes were minor, he sent them to the elephant. Elephant handlers staked them before the great elephant and tried to convince it to step on them. The huge elephant crushed most, but sometimes refused. Akbar believed this proved their innocence and then released them. \nDifferent regions crushed people by elephant in different ways. One region put people inside of a bag, so they would not have to watch what was about to happen. Then, the elephant would crush the bag flat with the condemned inside. In another region, people made the condemned watch the elephant slowly come from far away. Its huge feet kept coming closer. Sometimes, they buried the condemned to the neck. The elephant would come and step on the head. Some places made the condemned put his head on a special stand. The stand had fountains on the sides where brains and blood would flow when the elephant pressed down its huge foot.\nMilitary use.\nFor hundreds of years, people used elephants for military purposes. Death under the foot of an elephant was common for people who left the army or prisoners as well as for military criminals.\nHistory in writing.\nThere are few records about crushing by elephant. Many records were lost. The British wrote about about it during their long rule of India.\nRobert Knox was an English traveler. He wrote about a Sri Lankan crushing in 1681."}
{"id": "3493", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3493", "title": "Power network", "text": "A Power network is a type of contact network where its members can tell other people what to do.\nIt must be large enough to literally scare or force people to go along with its requests, which makes them orders. This typically requires thousands of people in constant touch with each other.\nA political party is the most obvious example. It is typically much larger than a social network but is not one, since people can only call on each other for a small number of reasons, and perhaps at specific times. Also not every member of the network has the same role or right to help.\nA corporation may also be a power network if it relies on many power relations to maintain itself - for instance, the right to draw oil from the ground or dump waste without being held responsible for it.\nWhen a power network achieves some stable grasp of political power and daily working control of some important infrastructure, it becomes a power structure. In a democracy the visible power networks represented by the parties compete regularly in an election - but much of the power structure, typically the bureaucracy, does not change, and is typically ignored as a power network in itself."}
{"id": "3494", "revid": "1091226", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3494", "title": "Citizenship", "text": "Citizenship is a legal relationship between a person and a country. Usually the country is the one they were born in, lives in, supports, and in return gets protection. A person is usually a citizen of the country where he or she is born, but sometimes a person will apply for naturalization, to become a citizen in another country. There are countries which allow dual (two) citizenship, and countries which do not.\nDefinitions.\nA citizen is a member of a sovereign group of people that have certain rights. Governments protect these rights or take advantage of them. Some Governments may exile people from citizenship laws on such matter vary between countries.\nCitizenship in Canada.\nPeople born in Canada become citizens of the country by \"Jus soli\" even if their parents are not citizens.\nIn 2018 the New York Times reported that 20% of babies born in Richmond Hospital in Richmond, British Columbia, were born to mothers involved in birth tourism. This means that the babies automatically acquire Canadian citizenship."}
{"id": "3495", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3495", "title": "Elephant", "text": "Elephants are large grey animals with big ears, long noses and white tusks. They are the largest living land mammals. The largest elephant recorded was one shot in Angola, 1974. It weighed 27,060 pounds (12.25 tonnes) and stood 13 feet 8 inches (2.16 m) tall.\nAt birth, an elephant calf may weigh as much as 100 kg (225 pounds). The baby elephant develops for 20 to 22 months inside its mother. No other land animal takes this long to develop before being born.\nIn the wild, elephants have strong family relationship. Their ways of acting toward other elephants are hard for people to understand. They \"talk\" to each other with very low sounds. Most elephants sounds are so low, people cannot hear them. But elephants can hear these sounds far away. Elephants have strong, leathery skin to protect themselves.\nPhysical description.\nThere are two living genera of elephants. These are the African \"Loxodonta africanus\", and the Asian elephants \"Elephas maximus\".\nTrunk.\nAn elephant's most obvious part is the trunk. The trunk is a very long nose, made from the upper lip. An elephant uses its trunk to grab objects such as food. Though the rest of an elephant's skin is strong and thick, its trunk is very soft and sensitive. Elephants avoid Acacia trees with ants because they can bite the inside of an elephant's trunk. The trunk is also used when it trumpets. The elephant usually stands still, raises its trunk, and blows. This is a signal to other elephants and wildlife.\nTeeth.\nElephants have teeth and tusks. Tusks are large teeth coming out of their upper jaws.\nA lot of ivory comes from elephant tusks. Ivory traders killed many elephants, so now hunting them is illegal.\nIn total, they have 24 teeth: 12 front teeth, called premolars, and 12 back teeth, called molars. When the last molar wears out, the elephant dies because it cannot eat. They can live for about 70 years. But in a zoo or circus, people can keep elephants alive by feeding them soft food.\nGrass wears down their teeth because it has a high concentration of silica and is very abrasive. Elephants use their teeth in sequence, not all at once. This means that, at any time, they only have one tooth in each jaw, a total of four.\nDifferences between African and Asian elephants.\nAfrican elephants are larger and have bigger ears. They are grazers who still do quite a lot of browsing: they eat leaves, branches and grass. These big ears have many \"veins\", which carry blood throughout the body. Biologists think that the blood going through their ears helps African elephants to cool off. The weather is hotter in Africa than in Asia, so cooling is important for African elephants. Female African elephants have tusks, but female Asian elephants do not. African elephants have a low place in their back. African elephants have two \"fingers\" at the end of their trunks, but Asian elephants only have one. Indian elephants eat mainly grass.\nSome African elephants live on the savanna while others live in the forest. Today, many people think these are different species. Scientists named the forest group Loxodonta cyclotis and the savanna group Loxodonta africanus.\nThe African forest elephant is the third largest living land animal in the world.\nEvolution.\nElephants are distantly related to sea cows, which are large aquatic mammals. Early ancestors in the Palaeocene and Eocene were small, semi-aquatic animals. By the Miocene several groups of large mainly forest-dwelling elephants evolved, the gomphotheres and deinotheres. Their teeth show little wear, indicating a diet of soft, nongritty, forest vegetation.\nModern elephants \u2013 the actual family Elephantidae \u2013 evolved from gomphotheres as the climate became cooler and drier in the Pliocene and Pleistocene. This includes the mammoth and mastodon as well as modern elephants.\nThe gomphotheres lasted a long time, and were hunted by modern man. There was a change in plant resources, with the reduced forests and extended grassland. This favoured specialist grass feeders over generalist eaters. This change in the dietary supply was one of the factors which forced gomphotheres toward extinction in the late Pleistocene in South America. The remaining population probably succumbed to climatic change and/or human predation around the time of the Holocene margin.\nThe significant thing about modern elephants (especially Indian elephants) is that they eat grass: they are primarily grazers, rather than browsers. Compared with gomphotheres, the teeth of modern elephants are quite different.\nUses.\nHumans have used elephants for different things. The Carthaginian general Hannibal took some elephants across the Alps when he fought the Romans. He probably used the North African elephant, a kind of elephant that does not live today. It was smaller than other African elephants. Elephants are used by tourists as rides.\nPeople have used Indian elephants to move around and to have fun. Many circuses have them. Siamese, Indians, and other South Asians used them for several things. They fought in armies, and they crushed criminals. They also did heavy work like lifting trees and moving logs.\nHowever, people have never \"domesticated\" elephants. Domesticated animals are tame and have babies under human control. The male elephant in heat is dangerous and hard to control. This state is called musth. Most elephants used by people are female, except those used in war. In a battle, female elephants run from males, so armies needed males. Elephants are used by tourists for riding.\nStatus today.\nBoth African and Asian elephants are endangered species. Elephants in captivity do not make many babies, and some captive elephants are abused and mistreated. \nAfrican elephants receive some legal protection in every country where they are found. However, 70% of their range exists outside protected areas. Conservation efforts in some areas have led to more elephants. Local numbers may be controlled by contraception or moving the elephants to other places. Large-scale culling (legal killing) ceased in 1988, when Zimbabwe stopped doing it. In 1989, trade in elephants and their products (ivory, meat) was made illegal. Appendix II status (which allows restricted trade) was given to elephants in Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe in 1997 and South Africa in 2000. In some countries, sport hunting of the animals is legal: Botswana, Cameroon, Gabon, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe have export quotas for elephant trophies. The IUCN estimates a total of around 440,000 individuals for 2012.\nThe total population of Asian elephants is about 40,000\u201350,000 (a rough estimate). Around half of the population is in India. Although Asian elephants are declining in numbers overall, particularly in Southeast Asia, the population in the Western Ghats may be increasing.\nFamily.\nA female elephant will have a single baby (called a \"calf\") every four or five years. Calves are born tall and weigh around . An elephant's gestation lasts about 22 months. Another female elephant often stays with the new mother until its baby is born. The newborn elephant can often stand within a half hour after it is born. Mother elephants touch their babies gently with their trunks. It takes a baby a year or more to control its trunk and learn its many uses.\nBaby elephants nurse for the first two years of their lives. After it is born, the first thing that the baby does is wobble in search of its mother's milk. It drinks about 10 liters of milk every day.\nMiscellaneous.\nWhite elephants are considered holy in Thailand.\nThe most famous fictional elephant is Dumbo. It is a flying elephant in a Disney movie. \"The Elephant's Child\" is one of Rudyard Kipling's \"Just So Stories\"\nGanesha is the god of wisdom in Hinduism. He has an elephant's head.\nThe elephant is the symbol for the United States Republican Party. It is like the Democratic Party's donkey. The first person to use the elephant as a symbol for the Republican Party was Thomas Nast. He did that in a Harper's Weekly cartoon in 1874."}
{"id": "3496", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3496", "title": "Buddhism", "text": "Buddhism originated in India, based on the teachings, of Siddhartha Gautama, later known as Gautama Buddha. A Buddha is one who is said to be awake to the truth of life. \nOver the centuries his teachings spread from Nepal to Central Asia, Tibet, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, China, Mongolia, Korea, Japan, and now Europe and North and South America. Theravada Buddhism is most common in South Asia; Mahayana further north. Buddhism exists in many different strands today, but all schools and sects share basic ideas. About seven percent of the people of the world are Buddhist. \nWhile many people see Buddhism as a religion, others see it as a philosophy, and others as a way of finding reality.\nBackground and Buddhist concepts.\nSiddhartha Gautama (563483 BC) began life as the infant prince of a small kingdom in what is now the southern part of Nepal. As an adult he left wealth and status behind to search for truth. Enlightened at the age of 35, the Buddha spent the next 45 years of his life traveling and teaching in the northern part of India. He died at the age of 80.\nThe Buddha focused much of his teaching on how to overcome suffering. He saw that all living things suffer in being born, in getting sick, in growing old, and in facing death. By overcoming suffering, he taught, a person will be truly happy. \nEarly teaching. His first lesson after becoming enlightened was to other seekers who had also renounced the world. This was a group of holy men or monks with whom the Buddha had studied for five or more years. To them he first presented what he saw as the Four Noble Truths of life and the Eightfold Noble Path (see below). These teachings identify the causes of suffering and their cure.\nThree marks of existence. The Buddha taught that life is best understood as being \"impermanent\" (everything changes), \"unsatisfactory\" (left on our own we are never truly happy), and \"interdependent\" (all things are linked, even to the degree that the self is better understood as an illusion). \nThe middle way. Buddhism teaches non-harm and \"moderation\" or balance, not going too far one way or the other. This is called the Middle Way, and encourages people to live in balance. \nMeditation. The Buddha recommended meditation as a way to discipline the mind and see the world as it is. Buddhists may meditate while sitting in a special or specific way. Standing and walking meditation are other styles. \nThree poisons. In discussing suffering, the Buddha identified the three poisons of desire, anger and stupidity, and he showed that we could end our suffering by letting go of desires and overcoming anger and stupidity. \nNirvana. The complete letting go of negative influences is called Nirvana, meaning \"to extinguish,\" like putting out the flame of a candle. This end of suffering is also called Enlightenment. In Buddhism, Enlightenment and Nirvana often mean the same thing.\nDo Buddhists believe in god or gods? The Buddha would not say if gods exist or not, although gods play a part in some Buddhist stories. If someone asked the Buddha, \"Do gods exist?\" he maintained a \"noble silence\". That is, he would not confirm or deny. Buddhists do not believe that people should look to gods to save them or bring them enlightenment. Rather individuals should work out their own path the best they can. \nOther basic teachings. Many of the Buddha's ideas are found in other Indian religions, especially Hinduism. \nWho is Buddha?\n\"Buddha\" is a Pali word which means \"The Enlightened one\". Someone who has woken up to the truth of the mind and suffering and teaches the truth to others is called a Buddha. The word \"Buddha\" often means the historical Buddha named Buddha Shakyamuni (Siddhartha Gautama). Buddhists do not believe that a Buddha is a god, but that he is a human being who has woken up and can see the true way the mind works. They believe this knowledge totally changes the person. This person can help others become \"enlightened\" too. Enlightened people are beyond birth, death, and rebirth. \nWho was the first Buddha?\nAccording to Buddhism, there were countless Buddhas before Gautama Buddha and there will be many Buddhas after him. \nIn Pali texts, the first Buddha in Buddhavamsa sutta was Ta\u1e47ha\u1e45kara Buddha. The Mahapadana sutta says the earliest Buddha of the recent seven buddhas was Vipassi Buddha (\"But sutta is not saying that Vipassi is first Buddha\"). Counting from the present \"kalpa\" (the beginning of our present world (Earth)) Gautama Buddha is considered the fourth Buddha. In this telling, the first is Kakusandho Buddha, second Konakamano Buddha, and the third Kassapo Buddha. The last Buddha of this \"kalpa\" will be Maitreya Buddha. Then the world (Earth) will renew itself and from then begins a new \"kalpa\".\nBeliefs of Buddhism.\nThe three jewels.\nBuddhists respect and treasure the \"Three Jewels\", which are the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.\nThe Buddha refers to the awakened one, the Dharma to the Buddha's teachings, and the Sangha to the people who follow the Buddha and his teachings. \nBuddhists say \"I take \"refuge\" in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.\" They find comfort in these jewels or treasures. \nFour noble Truths.\nThe Buddha's first and most important teachings are the Four Noble Truths.\nNoble Eightfold Path.\nThe Buddha told people to follow a special way of life called the \"Noble Eightfold Path\" if they want to understand the \"Four Noble Truths\". These are:\nFive precepts.\nBuddhists are encouraged to follow five \"precepts\", or guidelines. The Buddha taught that killing, stealing, having sex in a harmful way, and lying are not signs of skill.\nIf a person wants to be a monk or nun, he or she will follow other \"precepts\" as well."}
{"id": "3504", "revid": "526512", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3504", "title": "Story", "text": "A story can be different things:"}
{"id": "3505", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3505", "title": "Governor General", "text": "Governor General is a representative of a head of state. The term is mostly used in Commonwealth countries, where the governor general is a representative of the monarch.\nSometimes the title is spelled as \"Governor General\", which is used in Canada, but sometimes it is spelled with a hyphen \"-\", \"Governor-General\", which is the spelling used in Australia."}
{"id": "3506", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3506", "title": "Black hole", "text": "A black hole is a region of space from which nothing, not even light, can escape. According to the general theory of relativity, it starts existing when spacetime gets curved by a huge mass. There is a sphere around the black hole. If something goes inside the sphere, it can not leave. This sphere is called the event horizon. A black hole is black because it absorbs all the light that hits it. It reflects nothing, just like a perfect black body in thermodynamics. Under quantum mechanics, black holes have a temperature and emit Hawking radiation, which makes them slowly get smaller.\nBecause black holes are very hard to see, people trying to see them look for them by the way they affect other things near them. The place where there is a black hole can be found by tracking the movement of stars that orbit somewhere in space. Or people can find it when gas falls into a black hole, because the gas heats up and is very bright. This can be found by Earth or Earth-orbiting telescopes. Inside a black hole the rules of physics are very different.\nAstronomers have found evidence of supermassive black holes at the center of almost all galaxies. In 2008 astronomers found evidence that a supermassive black hole of more than four million solar masses is near the Sagittarius A* part of the Milky Way galaxy. \nHistory.\nIn 1783, an English clergyman called John Michell wrote that it might be possible for something to be so heavy you would have to go at the speed of light to get away from its gravity. Gravity gets stronger as something gets more massive. For a small thing, like a rocket, to escape from a larger thing, like Earth, it has to escape the pull of the Earth's gravity or it will fall back. The speed that it must travel to get away is called escape velocity. Bigger planets (like Jupiter) and stars have more mass, and have stronger gravity than Earth. Therefore, the escape velocity would need to be much faster. John Michell thought it was possible for something to be so big that the escape velocity would need to be faster than the speed of light, so even light could not escape. In 1796, Pierre-Simon Laplace wrote about the same idea in the first and second editions of his book \"Exposition du syst\u00e8me du Monde\" (it was removed from later editions).\nSome scientists thought Michell might be right, but others thought that light had no mass and would not be pulled by gravity. His theory was forgotten.\nIn 1916 Albert Einstein wrote an explanation of gravity called general relativity.\nA few months later, while serving in World War I, the German physicist Karl Schwarzschild used Einstein's equations to show that a black hole could exist. The Schwarzschild radius is the size of the event horizon of a non-rotating black hole. This radius was the measurement where the escape velocity was equal to the speed of light. If the radius of a star is smaller, then light is unable to escape, and it would be a dark star, or black hole.\nIn 1930, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar predicted that stars heavier than the sun could collapse when they ran out of hydrogen or other nuclear fuels to burn. In 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and H. Snyder calculated that a star would have to be at least three times as massive as the Sun to form a black hole. In 1967, John Wheeler invented the name \"black hole\" for the first time. Before that, they were called \"dark stars\".\nIn 1970, Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose showed that black holes \"must\" exist. Although the black holes are invisible (they cannot be seen), some of the matter that is falling into them is very bright.\nAs of spring 2019, there was an image of a black hole, or rather, the things orbiting the black hole. The image required many photos from different locations. One of the team members (Katie Bouman) made a compilation of all the images into one singular image.\nIn 2020, Roger Penrose, Reinhard Genzel and Andrea Ghez were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for their work on the theory of black holes.\nFormation of black holes.\nThe gravitational collapse of huge (high-mass) stars cause \"stellar mass\" black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have created very massive stars. When they collapsed they produced black holes of up to 103 solar masses. These black holes may be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies.\nMost of the energy released in gravitational collapse is given off very quickly. A distant observer sees the material falling in slowly and then stop just above the event horizon because of gravitational time dilation. The light given off just before the event horizon is delayed an infinite amount of time. So the observer never sees the formation of the event horizon. Instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.\nSupermassive black holes.\nBlack holes have also been found in the middle of almost every galaxy in the known universe. These are called supermassive black holes (SBH), and are the biggest black holes of all. They formed when the Universe was very young, and also helped to form all the galaxies.\nQuasars are believed to be powered by gravity collecting material into supermassive black holes in the centers of distant galaxies. Light cannot escape the SBHs at the center of quasars, so the escaping energy is made outside the event horizon by gravitational stresses and immense friction on the incoming material.\nHuge central masses (106 to 109 solar masses) have been measured in quasars. Several dozen nearby large galaxies, with no sign of a quasar nucleus, have a similar central black hole in their nuclei. Therefore, it is thought that all large galaxies have one, but only a small fraction are active (with enough accretion to power radiation) and so are seen as quasars.\nEffect on light.\nAt the middle of a black hole, there is a gravitational center called a singularity. It is impossible to see into it because the gravity prevents any light escaping. Around the tiny singularity, there is a large area where light which would normally pass by gets sucked in as well. The edge of this area is called the event horizon. The area beyond the event horizon is the black hole. The gravity of the black hole gets weaker at a distance. The event horizon is the place farthest away from the middle where the gravity is still strong enough to trap light.\nOutside the event horizon, light and matter will still be pulled toward the black hole. If a black hole is surrounded by matter, the matter will form an \"accretion disk\" (accretion means \"gathering\") around the black hole. An accretion disk looks something like the rings of Saturn. As it gets sucked in, the matter gets very hot and shoots x-ray radiation into space. Think of this as the water spinning around the hole before it falls in.\nMost black holes are too far away for us to see the accretion disk and jet. The only way to know a black hole is there is by seeing how stars, gas and light behave around it. With a black hole nearby, even objects as big as a star move in a different way, usually faster than they would if the black hole was not there.\nSince we cannot see black holes, they must be detected by other means. When a black hole passes between us and a source of light, the light bends around the black hole creating a mirror image. That effect is called gravitational lensing.\nHawking radiation.\nHawking radiation is black body radiation which is emitted by black hole, due to quantum effects near the event horizon. It is named after the physicist Stephen Hawking, who provided a theoretical argument for its existence in 1974.\nHawking radiation reduces the mass and the energy of the black hole and is therefore also known as \"black hole evaporation\". This happens because of the virtual particle-antiparticle pairs. Due to quantum fluctuations, this is when one of the particles falls in and the other gets away with the energy/mass. Because of this, black holes that lose more mass than they gain through other means are expected to shrink and ultimately vanish. Micro black holes (MBHs) are predicted to be larger net emitters of radiation than larger black holes and should shrink and dissipate faster.\nProperties of black holes.\nThe no hair theorem states that a stable black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum. If this is true, then any two black holes that have the same values for these three properties will look the same. As of 2020, it is unclear if the no hair theorem is true for real black holes.\nThe properties are special, because all three can be measured from outside the black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, far away from the black hole. The angular momentum or spin can also be measured from far away."}
{"id": "3511", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3511", "title": "Sheffield", "text": "Sheffield is a big city in a region called South Yorkshire in the North of England. There are 534,500 people living there. Sheffield is in the middle of lots of hills. The city centre is where the River Sheaf meets the River Don, and Sheffield gets its name from the River Sheaf. The city is east of the Peak District National Park. It is estimated that Sheffield has over two million trees, which is more than any city in Europe per each person. 61% of the city is green space, such as parks and forests.\nThe area of Sheffield used to be the Anglo-Saxon shire of Hallamshire, the city itself was founded later.\nIndustry.\nSheffield is famous for making cutlery (like knives and spoons). People in Sheffield have made cutlery for a very long time (a Sheffield-made knife is referred to in Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\", a book from the Middle Ages). Sheffield is also famous for making steel. Benjamin Huntsman discovered the crucible technique for making steel in 1740. In 1856, Henry Bessemer invented the Bessemer converter steelmaking furnace. Henry moved to Sheffield to make steel. Later, in 1912, Harry Brearley invented stainless steel in Sheffield.\nSports.\nThe first football team in the world is from Sheffield, Sheffield F.C., set up in 1857. Sheffield currently has two big professional football teams, Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United.\nBands.\nThere are lots of famous bands from Sheffield. Some of them are Pulp, the Human League, Def Leppard and the Arctic Monkeys. Michael Palin is also from Sheffield.\nThere is a big arena called the Motorpoint Arena in Sheffield. WWE have visited this arena to do live shows."}
{"id": "3515", "revid": "590442", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3515", "title": "Fertilizer", "text": "A fertilizer is a chemical that helps plants to grow. It is used to replace the mineral salts taken by plants or removed/washed away by rain.\nCommon fertilizers:\nThe important things in fertilizer are:\nWhen fertilizers are offered for sale, the percentage of N, P, and K must be written on the bags or boxes, but for historcal reasons, P is shown as %P2O5 and K is shown as %K2O.\nE.g.:9-23-30 which means: 9% N, 23%P2O5 and 30%K2O.\nIn Australia the pecent of elemental sulfur must also be shown.\nIn the UK, the elemental composition (in percentages) may also be shown alongside the mandatory traditional system, provided the numbers are put inside square brackets.\nLeafy plants need lots of N. Flowering plants need lots of P and K.\nA soil test can tell how much N, P, and K is needed."}
{"id": "3516", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3516", "title": "Military", "text": "The military is the group or groups of people that are given power to defend something (mostly a country). They are armed, so they are called the armed forces. The military protects its country by defending it from the armed forces of enemies, if there is a war. The military can also be ordered by the government of the country to attack another country. The word \"military\" comes from Latin \"miles\", warrior.\nThere are many jobs to do in a military. Some jobs are for fighting and some are for other work to support the military. Some things people do in the military are use weapons, drive vehicles, and repair weapons. Other people in the military learn how to fly aircraft, pilot ships, or repair engines. People in the military usually wear clothes called a uniform. In some places, especially where there may be combat, a uniform often comes in a camouflage pattern which is designed to make the person hard to see in the forest or desert.\nThere are two ways to join the military. In many countries, people join the military because they want to. In other countries, there are laws that some people have to be in the military, even if they do not want to be. This is called \"the draft\" or \"conscription\". It usually depends on age and physical fitness. Old military people or former military people are called \"veterans\". Some are members of a military reserve force.\nThe military of a country is usually divided into different branches organizations that do different kinds of work. These branches usually are:\nSometimes the military has more branches that do more specialized work. For example, in the United States and United Kingdom there are:\nSome big countries even have small units which perform special actions which are very difficult. They are called special forces.\nThere are also mercenaries, soldiers who fight just for pay and have little loyalty to whomever might hire them, and private military contractors (PMC), which are under the command of a company (civilian company). The Medieval Italian \"condottieri\" were a historical example of PMCs. A warlord may have a private army, which are often no more trustworthy than common gangsters or criminals.\nJoining up and training.\nIn most countries of the world, young men and (in a few countries) women between 17 and 18 and of good health may be forced by the government of their country to join the military and have military training. This is called \"conscription\". The countries that do not have conscription include Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, France, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Malta, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, and the United Kingdom. In some countries, such as Argentina and United States, conscription is legal but is not used, at the present time.\nWhen a person wants to join the military as a volunteer, they \"enlist\". (This means simply that they put their name on a list.) They have to be above a certain age, 17 or 18 in most countries. They have to pass physical fitness tests to show that they are well enough to do the jobs that they will have to do. They must also have good enough hearing, to hear orders, and good enough sight to use a rifle. \nNew people in the military are often called \u201crecruits\u201d. They have training at a special camp, sometimes called \u201cboot camp\" or \"basic training\". During this training, the recruits usually have very little free time. They learn to understand the \"orders\" or \"commands\" that are given by the officers to the \"troops\". (The troops are the military people in a group.) They learn the right ways to obey the orders. They do a lot of exercise to improve their fitness and strength. They learn about weapons, first aid, and their uniforms and \"kit\". (Their kit is their equipment.) Recruits also learn how to march. (This is the way to walk together, keeping \"in step\".) Learning to march is sometimes called \u201cdrill\u201d. By the time soldiers finish \"boot camp\", they should know enough to be a helpful person in their group. The camp usually finishes with a parade in which the newly trained recruits show off their marching and other skills they have learned in front of important visitors. Once the recruits are fully trained, they are ready to defend (protect) their country from attack, or to go to [war], if necessary."}
{"id": "3518", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3518", "title": "Photosynthesis", "text": "Photosynthesis is the process by which plants and some microorganisms make substances like carbohydrates. It is an endothermic (takes in heat) chemical process that uses sunlight to turn carbon dioxide into sugars. The sugars are used by the cell as energy, and to build other kinds of molecules.\nPhotosynthesis is vital for life on Earth. Green plants build themselves using photosynthesis. Algae, protists and some bacteria also use it. Some exceptions are organisms that directly get their energy from chemical reactions; these organisms are called chemoautotrophs.\nPhotosynthesis can happen in different ways, but there are some parts that are common.\nPhotosynthesis occurs in the chloroplasts in leaves (or other green tissues). They contain chlorophyll, the green pigment that absorbs light energy. In leaves, palisade cells have chloroplasts to capture light.\nOxygen is produced as a result of photosynthesis and released into the atmosphere through respiration. All the oxygen in the atmosphere has its origin in plants (including those microorganisms which do photosynthesis)\nGlucose is used in respiration (to release energy in cells). It is stored in the form of starch (which is converted back to glucose for respiration in the dark). Glucose can also be converted into other compounds for growth and reproduction e.g. cellulose, nectar, fructose, amino acids and fats.\nThe process.\nPhotosynthesis has two main sets of reactions (phases). Light-dependent reactions which need light to do work; and light-independent reactions which do not need light to do work.\nLight-dependent phase.\nLight energy from the sun is used to split water molecules (photolysis). The sunlight hits chloroplasts in the plant. This causes an enzyme to split the water. Water, when split, gives oxygen, hydrogen, and electrons.\nHydrogen, along with electrons energized by light, converts NADP into NADPH which is then used in the light-independent reactions. Oxygen gas diffuses out of the plant as a waste product of photosynthesis, and ATP is synthesized from ADP and inorganic phosphate. This all happens in the grana of chloroplasts.\nDark phase.\nDuring this reaction, sugars are built up using carbon dioxide and the products of the light-dependent reactions (ATP and NADPH) and various other chemicals found in the plant in the Calvin Cycle. Therefore, the light-independent reaction cannot happen without the light-dependent reaction. Carbon dioxide diffuses into the plant and along with chemicals in the chloroplast, ATP, and NADPH, glucose is made and finally, transported around the plant by translocation.\nFactors affecting photosynthesis.\nThere are three main factors affecting photosynthesis:\nLight intensity.\nIf there is little light shining on a plant, the light-dependent reactions will not work efficiently. This means that photolysis (breakdown of water by light) will not happen quickly, and therefore little NADPH and ATP will be made. This shortage of NADPH and ATP will lead to the light-independent reactions not working as NADPH and ATP are needed for the light-independent reactions to work.\nThe light intensity required is easily investigated in an aquatic plant such as pondweed. The oxygen bubbles given off can be counted or the volume measured. By changing the distance between light and plant, the light intensity is made to vary. Change in light intensity will affect the change in rate of photosynthesis . Artificial lighting can be used in the dark to maximise the photosynthetic rate.\nCarbon dioxide levels.\nCarbon dioxide is used in the light-independent reactions. It combines with NADPH and ATP and various other chemicals (such as Ribulose Bisphosphate) to form glucose. Therefore, if there is not enough carbon dioxide, then there will be a buildup of NADPH and ATP and not enough glucose will be formed.\nTemperature.\nThere are many enzymes working in photosynthetic reactions \u2013 such as the enzyme in photolysis. All enzymes work best at their optimum temperature. All light-dependent and light-independent reactions will occur normally at average or optimum temperatures. Tropical plants have a higher temperature optimum than the plants adapted to temperate climates.\nWhen the temperatures are too low, there is little kinetic energy, so the reaction rate decreases. If the temperatures are too high, the enzymes become \"denatured\" and the catalysis of photosynthesis reaction stops.\nGreenhouses must keep an optimum temperature for normal functioning of plants.\nEarly evolution.\nThe first photosynthetic organisms probably evolved early in the history of life. They may have used reducing agents such as hydrogen or hydrogen sulfide as sources of electrons, rather than water. Cyanobacteria appeared later, and the excess oxygen they produced contributed to the oxygen catastrophe. This made the evolution of complex life possible.\nEffectiveness.\nToday, the average rate of energy capture by photosynthesis globally is approximately 130\u00a0terawatts, which is about six times larger than the current power used by human civilization.\nPhotosynthetic organisms also convert around 100\u2013115 thousand million metric tonnes of carbon into biomass per year."}
{"id": "3520", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3520", "title": "Casserole", "text": "A casserole is a baked dish for many different types of food, mixed together in a fluid based on liquid. The start ingredient is often a roux. Often, one of the ingredients is a can of soup. The whole point of a casserole is that it cooks material \"slowly\". That means it can use ingredients which would not be edible if fried or roasted. \nThe casserole needs to simmer below boiling point for hours, depending on the ingredients. That way tough meat and vegetables become soft and edible.\nIt is a simple way to cook a nutritional meal. \nCasserole is from a French word meaning \"sauce-pan\"; a large, deep dish used either to cook something in an oven or to serve the food cooked in it. The French word\u00a0 \"casserole\" \u00a0had been derived from the old Provencal word, \"cassa\" and the Medieval Latin word, \"cattia\", both of these words meaning \"ladle\". \nCasseroles are usually cooked slowly in the oven, usually covered. They may be served as a main course or a side dish, and may be served in the vessel in which they were cooked. Types of casserole include ragout, hotpot, cassoulet, tajine, moussaka, lasagne, shepherd's pie, gratin, rice or macaroni timballo, and carbonnade.\nA popular type of casserole is green bean casserole, which has green beans, milk or cream, and fried onions. It was first cooked in Berlin, New Hampshire in 1866 by Elmire Jolicoeur.\nThe second illustration proves how old the idea is. That casserole dish has a lid, and a spout for steam to escape. The heat is applied from below as it is with a stew.\nEarly casserole dishes were rice-based that were pounded and pressed and then filled with meat. The first popular meals included French cassoulet, British pot pies, Italian lasagna, and Greek moussaka. Macaroni and cheese is the oldest written casserole recipe found in 1250."}
{"id": "3521", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3521", "title": "Plate", "text": "A plate is a type of dish where food can be placed after being cooked for eating. Sometimes they are called dishes. They may be made out of ceramic, plastic, paper, or styrofoam.\nA plate is also one of the broken pieces of lithosphere of the Earth.\nAll plates have irregular shapes. They lie and float on the upper mantle. They move very slowly in different directions. Their movement is driven by the convection currents in the magma.\nA plate can contain both oceanic and continental crusts. Some contain oceanic crust only."}
{"id": "3523", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3523", "title": "Flea", "text": "The flea (\"Siphonaptera\") is an insect which lives on many animals and sometimes humans. Fleas are ectoparasites and drink the blood of the animal they bite.\nFleas live outdoors in sand or tall grass, and jump to any passing animal and lay eggs. Flea bites are usually red bumps and they itch. \nThere are many species of flea such as dog fleas, cat fleas, human fleas, northern rat fleas, and the oriental rat flea. During the Middle Ages, the oriental rat flea spread a bacteria that caused the bubonic plague, also known as the Black Death or Black Plague. This was a huge epidemic much more severe than today's bird flu. The oriental rat flea was infected by the bacteria \"Yersinia pestis\". "}
{"id": "3524", "revid": "7667911", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3524", "title": "Terrorism", "text": "Terrorism is the use of fear and acts of violence in order to Intimidate societies, governments or against an ideology. Many different types of social or political organizations might use terrorism to try to achieve their goals. People who do the terrorism are called \"Terrorests\". The foundation of modern terrorism is the work of Sergey Nechayev, a Russian radical who developed strategies for carrying out terrorism. It also include politics.\nIt is difficult to explain terrorism. Terrorism has no official criminal law definition at the international level. Common definitions of terrorism refer to the violent acts which are intended to create fear (terror). They may be done for a religious, political, or ideological goal, and uses illegal violence. Some definitions now include acts of unlawful violence and war. The use of similar tactics by criminal gangs is not usually called terrorism. The same actions may be called terrorism when done by a politically motivated group.\nThere are over 10000 definitions of \"terrorism\". In some cases, the same group may be described as \"freedom fighters\" by its supporters and \"terrorists\" by its opponents. The term 'terrorism' is often used by states to criticize political opponents.\nOne form of terrorism is the use of violence against noncombatants for the purpose of gaining publicity for a group, cause, or individual.\nAccording to Memorial Institute for Prevention of Terrorism, terrorists killed 20,498 people in 2006. The major effect of terrorism comes from the fear which generates.\nCounter-terrorism.\nCounter-terrorism is broad in scope. Specific types of counter-terrorism include:"}
{"id": "3528", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3528", "title": "South Africa", "text": "The Republic of South Africa is a country in the southern region of Africa. About fifty-seven million people live there. South Africa is next to Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho and Swaziland. \nThe biggest city of South Africa is Johannesburg. The country has three capitals for different purposes. They are Cape Town, Pretoria, and Bloemfontein. This is because the government is based in Pretoria, the parliament is in Cape Town and the Supreme Court is in Bloemfontein.\nThere are 11 national languages. They are Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Xhosa, Zulu, Swati, Setswana, Sesotho, Sesotho sa Leboa, Venda and Tsonga. They are also known as National Lexicography Units (NLUs). Because of all the languages, the country has an official name in each language.\nOne of South Africa's most well known people is Nelson Mandela. He was its president from 1994 until 1999. He died in 2013 at the age of 95. The current president is Cyril Ramaphosa.\nMany rare animals such as lions, cheetahs, zebras and giraffes live in South Africa.\nSouth Africa is one of the richest countries in Africa.\nHistory.\nThe first European people to come to South Africa were Portuguese explorers. In 1487, Bartolomeu Dias found what he called the \"Cape of Storms\". The king of Portugal changed it to \"Cape of Good Hope\". He called it this because the cape gave the Portuguese a new chance to find a sea route to India.\nIn 1652, Jan van Riebeeck colonized the Cape. He started the camp for the Dutch East India Company. This was so that they could give fresh food to ships on their way to the south of Asia. There were very few native people living in the Cape. Because of this, slaves were brought from Indonesia, Madagascar and India to work at the colony. In 1795, Great Britain took the Cape from the Dutch East India Company, to stop France from taking it. The British gave it back in 1803 but then annexed the Cape in 1807 when the Dutch East India Company went bankrupt.\nDiamonds were found in South Africa in 1867. Gold was found in 1884. This made a great number of people to come to South Africa from Europe. They were hoping to make money.\nThe First Boer War happened in 1880-1881. The war was between the British and the Boers Republics. At that time, the British had the Cape. The Boer Republics were established when Dutch settlers moved north in the Great Trek. The British lost the war and came back 8 years later in 1899. They won this Second Boer War in 1902. The British had brought many more soldiers the second time. The Boers had no chance of winning. On 31 May 1910 the Union of South Africa was made from the Cape and Natal colonies. It was also made from Orange Free State and the Transvaal. These were two Boer Republics.\nGeography.\nSouth Africa is found at the southernmost region of Africa, with a long coastline that reaches more than and along two oceans (the South Atlantic and the Indian). At , South Africa is the 25th-largest country in the world and is almost the size of Colombia. Njesuthi in the Drakensberg at is the highest part in South Africa.\nThe back of South Africa is a big and flat. It is a very populated scrubland, the Karoo, which is drier towards the northwest along the Namib desert. The eastern coastline however, is well-watered, which makes a climate kind of like the tropics.\nTo the north of Johannesburg, the altitude drops beyond the of the Highveld. It then turns into the lower lying Bushveld, an area of mixed dry forest and a lot of wildlife. East of the Highveld, beyond the eastern escarpment, the Lowveld reaches towards the Indian Ocean. It has mostly high temperatures, and is also the location of subtropical agriculture.\nClimate.\nSouth Africa has a mostly temperate climate. It is surrounded by the Atlantic and Indian Oceans on three sides, and is located in the climatically milder southern hemisphere. Average elevation is higher towards the north (towards the equator) and further inland. Because of this varied topography and oceanic influence, different parts of South Africa have different climates.\nThere is a desert in the southern Namib in the farthest northwest and subtropical climate in the east along the Mozambique border and the Indian ocean. From the east, the land quickly rises over mountains towards the back plateau known as the Highveld. Even though South Africa is thought as semi-arid, there is a difference in climate as well as topography.\nThe southwest has a climate similar to that of the Mediterranean with mild, moderately wet winters and hot, dry summers. This area also makes much of the wine in South Africa. This region is also mostly known for its wind, which blows almost all year. The wind can sometimes be severe when passing around the Cape of Good Hope mostly gets bad for sailors, making many shipwrecks. Further east on the south coast, rainfall falls more evenly throughout the year, making a green landscape. This area is popularly known as the Garden Route.\nThe Orange Free State is mostly flat, because it lies in the center of the high plateau. North of the Vaal River, the Highveld becomes better watered and does not get subtropical heat. Johannesburg, in the center of the Highveld, is at 1,740 m (5,709 ft) and gets a yearly rainfall of 740 mm (29.9 in). Winters in this region are cold, although snow is rare.\nPlants and wildlife.\nSouth Africa is ranked sixth out of the world\u2019s 17 megadiverse countries, with more than 20,000 different kinds of plants, or about 10% of all the known species of plants on Earth, making it very rich in plant biodiversity.\nThe most common biome in South Africa is the grassland, mostly on the Highveld. This is where grasses, low shrubs, and acacia trees, mostly camel-thorn and whitethorn are more common then plants. Plants become even more less common towards the northwest. This is because of low rainfall. There are many species of water-storing plants like aloes and euphorbias in the very hot and dry Namaqualand area. The grass and thorn savanna turns slowly into a bush savanna towards the north-east of the country, with more thick growth. There are many numbers of baobab trees in this area, near the northern end of Kruger National Park.\nEconomy.\nSouth Africa's economy is divided. It is divided between First World and Third World standards. The developed part of the economy is similar to that of most nations with wealth (for example, Britain or Australia). The rest of the economy is closer to that of poor nations, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The main companies in South Africa are mining (mostly for gold and diamonds), car making, and service industries, such as insurance.\nUnemployment is very high. Income inequality is about the same as Brazil. During 1995\u20132003, the number of older jobs went down. Informal jobs went up. Overall unemployment got worse. The average South African household income went down a lot between 1995 and 2000. As for racial inequality, Statistics South Africa said that in 1995 the average white household earned four times as much as the average black household. In 2000 the average white family was earning six times more than the average black household. The action policies have seen a rise in black economic wealth. There is a developing black middle class. Other problems are crime, corruption, and HIV/AIDS. South Africa suffers from mostly heavy overall regulation compared to developed countries. labor rules have added to the unemployment weakness.\nPopulation.\nSouth Africa is a nation of about 50\u00a0million people of diverse origins, cultures, languages, and religions. The last census was held in 2001 and the next will be in 2011. Statistics South Africa had five racial categories by which people could classify themselves, the last of which, \"unspecified/other\" drew \"not needed\" responses, and these results were not counted. The 2009 middle-year estimated figures for the other categories were Black African at 79.3%, White at 9.1%, Colored at 9.0%, and Asian at 2.6%.\nEven though the population of South Africa has grown in the past decade (mostly because of immigration), the country had an yearly population growth rate of \u22120.501% in 2008 (CIA est.), counting immigration. The CIA thinks that in 2009 South Africa's population started to grow again, at a rate of 0.281%. South Africa is home to an estimated 5\u00a0million illegal immigrants, counting about 3\u00a0million Zimbabweans. A series of anti-immigrant riots happened in South Africa beginning on 11 May 2008.\nProvinces.\nSouth Africa is divided into 9 provinces. The provinces are in turn divided into 52 districts: 8 metropolitan and 44 district municipalities. The district municipalities are further divided into 226 local municipalities.\nMajor Cities.\n1. Johannesburg\n2. Cape Town\n3. Durban\n4. Pretoria\nSociety and culture.\nIt may be suggested that there is no single South African culture because of its ethnic diversity. Today, the diversity in foods from many cultures is enjoyed by all and marketed to tourists who wish to taste South African food. Food is not the only thing, music and dance is there too.\nSouth African food is mostly meat-based and has spawned the South African social gathering known as a \"braai\", or barbecue. South Africa has also developed into a big wine maker. It has some of the best vineyards lying in valleys around Stellenbosch, Franschoek, Paarl and Barrydale. \nSouth Africa is the only Western country of Africa.\nMost South African blacks still have poor lives. It is among these people, however, that cultural traditions live most strongly. This is because blacks have become urbanised and Westernised, much parts of traditional culture have fallen. Urban blacks normally speak English or Afrikaans in addition to their native tongue. There are smaller but still important groups of speakers of Khoisan languages who are not in the eleven official languages, but are one of the eight other officially recognized languages.\nMembers of middle class, who are mostly white but whose ranks are growing numbers of black, colored and Indian people, have lifestyles similar in many ways to that of people found in Western Europe, North America and Australasia. Members of the middle class often study and work from foreign countries for greater exposure to the markets of the world.\nApproximately 9,800 Roma gypsies live in South Africa.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2001 national census, Christians accounted for 79.7% of the population. This has Zion Christian (11.1%), Pentecostal (Charismatic) (8.2%), Roman Catholic (7.1%), Methodist (6.8%), Dutch Reformed (6.7%), Anglican (3.8%); members of other Christian churches accounted for another 36% of the population. Muslims accounted for 1.5% of the population, Hinduism about 1.3%, and Judaism 0.2%. 15.1% had no religious affiliation, 2.3% were other and 1.4% were unspecified.\nSports.\nSouth Africa's most liked sports are soccer, rugby union and cricket. Other sports that are popular are swimming, athletics, golf, boxing, tennis and netball. Soccer is the most liked among youth. There are other sports like basketball, surfing and skateboarding that are becoming more liked.\nFamous boxers from South Africa are Baby Jake Jacob Matlala, Vuyani Bungu, Welcome Ncita, Dingaan Thobela, Gerrie Coetzee and Brian Mitchell. There are football players who have played for major foreign clubs. Some of them are Lucas Radebe and Philemon Masinga (both were of Leeds United), Quinton Fortune (Atletico Madrid and Manchester United), Benni McCarthy (Ajax Amsterdam, F.C. Porto and Blackburn Rovers), Aaron Mokoena (Ajax Amsterdam, Blackburn Rovers and Portsmouth), Delron Buckley (Borussia Dortmund) and Steven Pienaar (Ajax Amsterdam and Everton). South Africa made Formula One motor racing's 1979 world champion Jody Scheckter. Famous current cricket players are Herschelle Gibbs, Graeme Smith, Jacques Kallis, JP Duminy and more. Most of them also participate in the Indian Premier League.\nSouth Africa has also made many world class rugby players. Some of them are Francois Pienaar, Joost van der Westhuizen, Danie Craven, Frik du Preez, Naas Botha, and Bryan Habana. South Africa hosted and won the 1995 Rugby World Cup at their first try. They won the 2007 Rugby World Cup in France. South Africa was only allowed to participate from 1995 since the end of Apartheid. It followed the 1995 Rugby World Cup by hosting the 1996 African Cup of Nations. It had the national team, 'Bafana Bafana,' going on to win the tournament. It also hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup. and the 2007 World Twenty20 Championship. Both of them were a great success.\nIn 2010, South Africa became the first African nation to host the FIFA World Cup. The national team has competed in three World Cups. It bid for the right to stage the 2004 Olympic Games, but finished third to Athens. South Africa is also well known for their cricket team. They are right now the world's number one in test match cricket.\nEducation.\nThe main schools span the first seven years of schooling. In the age of Apartheid, schools for blacks were subject to judgment through funding and so forth. Instruction can take place in Afrikaans as well. Public payment on education was at 5.4% of the 2002-05 GDP.\nMilitary.\nSouth Africa's military is the most powerful in southern Africa. South Africa spends more on its military than any of its neighboring countries do. They have very advanced weapons as a result. South Africa used to have nuclear weapons, but they were taken apart in 1993."}
{"id": "3529", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3529", "title": "Andorra", "text": "Andorra (), officially the Principality of Andorra, is a landlocked sovereign country located in the eastern Pyrenees Mountains of Southern Europe and bordered by Spain and France. There are about 84,000 people living in the country. The capital is Andorra la Vella. It is ruled by a Spanish Bishop and the French President. Andorra's government is a parliamentary democracy.\nAndorra is a rich country mostly because of tourism. There are about 10.2\u00a0million visitors each year.\nThe official language is Catalan, although Spanish, Portuguese, and French are also used.\nIt is not a member of the European Union. The euro is the money used.\nHistory.\nIt is said that Charles the Great (Charlemagne) gave the Andorran people their country in return for fighting against the Moors.\nBefore 1095, Andorra did not have any type of military protection. The Lord of Caboet and the Bishop of Urgell decided to rule Andorra together. In 1607 Henry IV of France said the head of the French state and the Bishop of Urgell would be co-princes of Andorra.\nAndorra declared war on Imperial Germany during World War I. It did not do any fighting. They stayed against Germany until 1957 because they were not in the Treaty of Versailles.\nAndorra doesn't have an Army. France and Spain help to defend Andorra. The country has a police force of 295.\nParishes.\nAndorra has seven parishes:\nGeography.\nAndorra is in the Pyrenees mountain range. The highest mountain is Coma Pedrosa.\nCities.\nThe largest cities in Andorra are:\nFor other locations in Andorra, see List of cities in Andorra.\nReligion.\nThe population of Andorra is mostly (90%) Roman Catholic. Their patron saint is Our Lady of Meritxell.\nEducation.\nChildren between the ages of 6 and 16 must have full-time education. Education up to secondary level is paid by the government.\nThe University of Andorra (UdA) is the state public university. It is the only university in Andorra."}
{"id": "3531", "revid": "195", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3531", "title": "Portsmouth Football Club", "text": ""}
{"id": "3537", "revid": "551548", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3537", "title": "Hiroshima", "text": "Hiroshima (\u5e83\u5cf6) is the capital city of Hiroshima Prefecture. It is the largest city in the Chugoku region of western Japan. About a million people live in Hiroshima.\nHistory.\nAtomic bombing.\nAt the time of the attack, Hiroshima was the headquarters of the 2nd General Army and 5th Division. It contained 40,000 Japanese soldiers within the city's limit, and was a beehive (or center) of war industry. The industry manufactured parts for planes and boats, bombs, rifles, and handguns. Children also were shown how to construct and throw gasoline bombs. and the heavy sick were assembling traps to be planted in the beaches of Kyushu. As with other Japanese cities, many of the strategic targets in Hiroshima were mixed with civilian homes and centers made of wood and paper. This made it harder to conduct a successful precision attack. And the highly inaccuracy of the bombing technology in World War II was owed to it. As a result, the city became the first nuclear weapon used against a target in history.\nThe bomb exploded over Hiroshima at 8:16 on the morning of August 6, 1945. Much of the city was destroyed. An estimated 70,000 persons were killed. 20,000 were Japanese soldiers and 20,000 were Korean slave laborers of all the kiled. Another 70,000 were injured. The bomb was nicknamed \"Little Boy\" after President Theodore Roosevelt. A building near the blast center still remains and is called the Atomic Bomb Dome.\nItsukushima shrine.\nNear to Hiroshima, there is a small island called Miyajima. The island is known for its deer. An old Shinto shrine named Itsukushima Shrine is also here. It is said that Itsukushima shrine was built at the end of the 5th century. The shrine is known for its use of red-colored wood, and especially for the \"torii\" gate. The gate leads into the shrine, which is partly underwater at high tide. Today, Itsukushima shrine and the Atomic Bomb Dome are registered as World Heritage sites. Also it was a landing site for the U.S."}
{"id": "3538", "revid": "7856698", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3538", "title": "Richter scale", "text": "The Richter scale is a scale of numbers used to tell the power (or magnitude) of earthquakes. Charles Richter developed the Richter Scale in 1935. His scale worked like a seismogram, measured by a particular type of \"seismometer\" at a distance of 100 kilometers (62 mi) from the earthquake. \nEarthquakes 4.5 or higher on the Richter scale can be measured all over the world. An earthquake a size that scores 3.0 is ten times the amplitude of one that scores 2.0. The energy that is released increases by a factor of about 32.\nEvery increase of 1 on the Richter scale corresponds to an increase in amplitude by a factor of 10 so therefore, it is a logarithmic scale.\nThe earthquake with the biggest recorded magnitude was the Great Chilean Earthquake. It had a magnitude of 9.5 on the Richter scale and occurred in 1960. Around 6,000 people died because of the earthquake. No earthquake has ever hit 10+ on the Richter Scale."}
{"id": "3539", "revid": "7847595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3539", "title": "Day", "text": "A day is the time it takes the Earth to spin around once. It is day time on the side of the Earth that is facing the Sun. When it is night time, that side of the Earth is facing away from the Sun. It takes 24 hours for the Earth to spin once, so that is one day, including the day time and night time. This is mean solar time, measured relative to the Sun. There is also sidereal time, measured relative to the fixed stars. The sidereal day is a few minutes shorter."}
{"id": "3540", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3540", "title": "Phases of the Moon", "text": " \nThe phases of the Moon are the different ways the Moon looks from Earth over about a month.\nAs the Moon orbits around the Earth, the half of the Moon that faces the Sun will be lit up. The different shapes of the lit portion of the Moon that can be seen from Earth are known as phases of the Moon. Each phase repeats itself every 29.5 days.\nThe same half of the Moon always faces the Earth, because of tidal locking. So the phases will always occur over the same half of the Moon's surface.\nA phase is an angle of the moon to the earth so it appears differently every day.\nPhases.\nThe moon goes through 8 major phases.\nSuper Pink Moon.\nA supermoon or Super Pink Moon takes place when moon's orbit is at its closest to the Earth. Supermoon take place each year between March and May. As Moon is exceptionally close to Earth; full Moon appears up to 7% larger and 15% brighter than a typical full moon. Traditionally any full moon that occurred in April was called a pink moon because it marked the blooming of Moss pink a wildflower."}
{"id": "3541", "revid": "1153456", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3541", "title": "Sphere", "text": "A sphere is a shape in space that is like the surface of a ball. Usually, the words \"ball\" and \"sphere\" mean the same thing. But in mathematics, a sphere is the surface of a ball, which is given by all the points in three dimensional space that are located at a fixed distance from the center. The distance from the center is called the radius of the sphere. When the sphere is filled in with all the points inside, it is called a ball.\nCommon things that have the shape of a sphere are basketballs, superballs, and playground balls. The Earth and the Sun are nearly \"spherical\", meaning sphere-shaped. \nA sphere is the three-dimensional analog of a circle.\nCalculating the surface area, circumference, diameter, radius and volume of a sphere.\nSurface area.\nUsing the circumference: formula_1\nUsing the diameter: formula_2\nUsing the radius: formula_3\nUsing the volume: formula_4\nCircumference.\nUsing the surface area: formula_5\nUsing the diameter: formula_6\nUsing the radius: formula_7\nUsing the volume: formula_8\nDiameter.\nUsing the surface area: formula_9\nUsing the circumference: formula_10\nUsing the radius: formula_11\nUsing the volume: formula_12\nRadius.\nUsing the surface area: formula_13 or formula_14\nUsing the circumference: formula_15\nUsing the diameter: formula_16\nUsing the volume: formula_17 formula_18 formula_19 formula_20 formula_21 (more simple but less precise)\nVolume.\nUsing the surface area: formula_22\nUsing the circumference: formula_23\nUsing the diameter: formula_24\nUsing the radius: formula_25\nEquation of a sphere.\nIn Cartesian coordinates, the equation for a sphere with a center at (formula_26, formula_27, formula_28) is as follows:\nwhere formula_30 is the radius of the sphere."}
{"id": "3543", "revid": "555269", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3543", "title": "Quantity", "text": "Quantity or amount is how much of something there is that can be counted or measured. \nCounting.\nWhole numbers (1, 2, 3 ...) are used to count things. This can be done by pointing to each one. As things are pointed to, a number is said. Start with the number one. Each time another thing is pointed to, the next whole number is used. When the last thing in a group it pointed to, that number is the quantity of the group. \nMeasuring.\nMeasuring is done with a ruler or a machine. We put a ruler next to a thing to measure how long it is. We put things on a scale to measure their mass. Other machines are used to measure other quantities such as temperature, speed, electric current, and so on.\nDecimal numbers.\nWhen measuring things, a whole number might not be the best answer. A distance might be longer than 5 meters, but less than 6 meters. Meter sticks are marked off in parts of a meter. Decimals are formed by marking off a ruler in ten equal parts. Each part is a tenth. 5.2 meters is a little bit longer than 5 meters. 5.7 meters is a little bit shorter than 6 meters. Each of these tenths can be marked with ten smaller parts. The one hundred centimeters on a meter stick are done this way; by marking ten equal parts, then marking ten equal parts of each of those parts.\nFraction numbers.\nFractions are used when there are parts of a whole number. The dial on a machine may be marked with four parts between each whole number. A scale with a bag of potatoes may show five and three-quarters kilograms. This would be almost six kilograms.\nThe words \"amount\" and \"number\".\nPeople often use the word \"amount\" when they should say \"number\". The words \"number\" and \"amount\" should be used if a particular number could be put: e.g."}
{"id": "3544", "revid": "7886945", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3544", "title": "Advertising", "text": "Advertising is how a company encourages people to buy their products, services or ideas. Advertising is one element of marketing, which also includes design, research and data mining.\nAn advertisement (or \"ad\" for short) is anything that draws good attention towards these things. It is usually designed by an advertising agency for a sponsor or brand and made public by various media. Ads appear on television, radio, newspapers, magazines and billboards in streets and cities. Advertisers use methods that attract attention.\nAdvertisers influence our emotions by techniques that include stereotyping and targeting the audience: who we are. Emotions are influenced by our occupation, beliefs, personality, self esteem, lifestyle, relationships, friends, how we look and what we wear.\nHistory.\nCommercial messages and political campaign displays have been found in the ruins of Pompeii and ancient Arabia. Lost and found advertising on papyrus was common in Ancient Greece and Rome. Wall or rock painting for commercial advertising is present to this day in many parts of Asia, Africa, and South America. The tradition of wall painting can be traced back to Indian rock art paintings that date back to 4000 BC.\nLondoner Thomas J. Barratt (1841\u20131914) has been called \"the father of modern advertising\". He worked for the Pears Soap company, eventually becoming its Chairman. Barratt created an advertising campaign for the company products. It used targeted slogans, images and phrases. One of his slogans, \"Good morning. Have you used Pears' soap?\" was famous in its day and into the 20th century.\nBarratt introduced many of the crucial ideas that lie behind successful advertising and these were widely circulated in his day. He constantly stressed the importance of a strong and exclusive brand image for Pears and of emphasizing the product's availability through saturation campaigns. He also understood the importance of constantly reevaluating the market for changing tastes and mores, stating in 1907 that \"tastes change, fashions change, and the advertiser has to change with them. An idea that was effective a generation ago would fall flat, stale, and unprofitable if presented to the public today. Not that the idea of today is always better than the older idea, but it is different \u2013 it hits the present taste.\"\nAs the economy expanded across the world during the 19th century, advertising grew alongside. In the United States, the success of this advertising format eventually led to the growth of mail-order advertising.\nVery important was the growth of mass media, with mass circulation illustrated newspapers in the later 19th century followed by movies, radio and television.\nTypes of advertising.\nAdvertising happens in many different ways. Many products are advertised on television, although not all channels permit advertising. The advertisements usually appear during breaks between a television show. They are usually for products, other television shows or movies and are not normally much longer than 30 seconds. Some radio stations have audio advertisements that play between programmes.\nAn advertisement for a movie is called a trailer. It shows a short collection of clips from the movie, and shows the date it will be released in cinemas.\nAdvertising also takes place on websites. These may appear as \"banner ads\" or \"popups\". They are often still images or flash animations. The owner of the website will get money when a user clicks on the advertisement. Sometimes they will get a percentage of the money if they buy a product.\nBillboards advertise products on highways and city streets. These may simply be freestanding billboards or may be part of street furniture such as a bus shelter. Buses and taxis are often covered in adverts, while budget airlines sometimes allow advertising inside their planes. Adverts also appear in newspapers, magazines and sports programmes. Many stadiums have adverts set around them. Sports teams, tournaments, television programmes and public events may have a sponsor who is the main or sometimes only advertiser.\nTechniques.\nAdvertisers use many different techniques to get people to notice their adverts, often using deliberately shocking or provocative images. Once they have managed to make people notice their advert, they need to 'sell' the product or brand. They may try to make the product look appealing, however often advertisers use humor in such a way that get people to remember the brand without actually promoting the product. Poor adverts can damage sales or spoil a brand's identity. And many more\nRegulations.\nAdvertising is often strictly regulated, for instance in the United Kingdom it is illegal to advertise tobacco, except in the shop where it is sold and this is also restricted. In France it is illegal to advertise alcohol, meaning that when many European football teams play in France, they cannot play in their usual shirts as breweries often advertise on sports shirts. It is also illegal to advertise on some television channels, the BBC in the United Kingdom and RTE in the Republic of Ireland are not allowed to permit advertising and instead make their revenue from selling a compulsory television licence. Some countries such as Canada regulate misleading advertising and labelling to try and prevent deceptive practices and protect consumers."}
{"id": "3555", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3555", "title": "Buddha", "text": "A Buddha is the holiest type of being in Buddhism, a teacher of God's and humans. The word \"Buddha\" means \"enlightened one\" in Sanskrit or Fully Awakened One in P\u0101li. \nIt is also a title for Siddhartha Gautama. He was the man who started Buddhism. Sometimes people call him \"the Buddha\" or the \"Shakyamuni Buddha\". Other times, people call any person a Buddha if they have found enlightenment. If a person has not found enlightenment yet, but is very close to reaching it, then he is called bodhisattva.\nSummary.\nBuddhists believe that there are many Buddhas. The most recent one was Gautama Buddha. People who will become Buddhas someday are called \"bodhisattvas.\" \nBuddhists believe that the Buddha was enlightened, which means that he knew all about how to live a peaceful life and how to avoid suffering. He is said to have never argued with other people, but only said what was true and useful, out of compassion for others.\nSome Buddhists pray to Buddhas, but Buddhas are not gods. Buddhas are teachers who help the people who will listen. A Buddha is a human being who has woken up and can see the true way the world works. This knowledge totally changes the person so that they can have a better life in the present and the future. A Buddha can also help a person achieve enlightenment. \nThere are ideas which are said to lead someone to enlightenment. They are called the \"Dharma\" (Sanskrit) or \"Dhamma\" (P\u0101li), meaning \"the way\" or \"the truth.\" Anyone can become a Buddha, but it is very difficult. He became Buddha under the peepal or \"bodhi\" tree at Bodhgaya in Bihar in what is now India.\nTypes of Buddhas.\nThere is a special type of Buddha called a \"pratyekabuddha\" or \"silent Buddhas\". These Buddhas reached \"enlightenment\" on their own, but they did not teach others. \nAnother type of Buddha is a \"samyaksambuddha\". This is the best kind of Buddha because he is able to teach all living beings.\nSeven Buddhas of the past.\nBuddhists believe that there have been many Buddhas in the past. There will also be many Buddhas in the future. Traditionally, seven Buddhas are given names.\nMaitreya will be the next Buddha.\n32 Signs of a Great Man.\nA Buddha is a person who has reached perfection. Some believe that there are 32 physical features of a Buddha; these are the 32 marks of a Great Man from Vedic brahmin folklore, but are mentioned in the P\u0101li canon. Some of these features are represented in art and sculpture. These are listed below.\nReferences.\n3. \u201cChapter 3 Buddhism. Origins and Fundamental Tenets. .\u201d Religions in the Modern World: Traditions and Transformations, section written by Cathy Cantwell &amp; Hiroko Kawanami., Routledge, 2016, pp. 75\u201378"}
{"id": "3556", "revid": "1061539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3556", "title": "Flag of the United States", "text": "The flag of the United States of America is a national flag. It has 7 red stripes and 6 white stripes. These 13 stripes represent the original thirteen colonies. The flag also has a blue \"canton\", a rectangle in the top left corner. There are 50 stars which represent the 50 states of America.\nWhen a new state joins the United States a new flag is made with an extra star. The new flag is first flown on the 4th of July, Independence Day.\nThe last states to join the United States were Alaska and Hawaii in 1959. Alaska joined on 3 January 1959, so the new flag with 49 stars was used from 4 July 1959. Hawaii joined on 21 August 1959 so the flag with 50 stars that is used today was not flown until 4 July 1960. This 50 star design was created by Robert G. Heft for a school project. \nThe colors in the flag are red, white and blue. The colors have no special meaning in the flag, but in the coat of arms white stands for purity and innocence, red for bravery and strength and blue for watchfulness, perseverance and justice. \nThe flag is also often called the Stars and Stripes, the Star-Spangled Banner, or Old Glory. The national anthem of the United States is a reference to the flag.\nEvolution of the United State's flag.\nSince 1818, a star for each new state has been added to the flag on the Fourth of July immediately following each state's admission. In years in which multiple states have been admitted, the number of stars on the flag has jumped correspondingly. The greatest example so far was in 1890, when five states were admitted within the span of a single year (North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Washington in November 1889 and Idaho on 3 July 1890). This change has typically been the only change made with each revision of the flag since 1777, with the exception of changes in 1795 and 1818, which increased the number of stripes to 15 and then returned it to 13, respectively.\nAs the exact pattern of stars was not specified prior to 1912, and the exact colors not specified prior to 1934, many of the historical U.S. national flags (shown below) have had varied designs."}
{"id": "3569", "revid": "1152007", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3569", "title": "America", "text": "America may refer to:"}
{"id": "3573", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3573", "title": "Ecological Yield", "text": ""}
{"id": "3576", "revid": "7860381", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3576", "title": "Mahatma Gandhi", "text": "Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (2 October 1869 \u2013 30 January 1948) was a leader of nationalism in British-ruled India. He is more commonly called Mahatma Gandhi; \"mahatma\" is an honorific meaning \"great-soul\" or \"venerable\" in Sanskrit. He was first called this in 1914 in South Africa. He is also called Peeu in India (Sindhi endearment for \"father\", \"papa\"). \nHe was the Martyr of the Nation since 1948. Rabindranath Tagore gave him the title of 'Mahatma'.\nGandhi was one of the most important people involved in the movement for the independence of India. He was a non-violent activist, who led the independence movement through a non-violent protest.\nEarly life.\nGandhi was born on October 2, 1869 in Kutch, India. Several members of his family worked for the government of the state. When Gandhi was 18 years old, he went to study law in England. After he became a lawyer, he went to the British colony of South Africa where he experienced laws that said people with dark skin had fewer rights than people with light skin. In 1897, Gandhi was attacked by a group of people in Durban Harbor, South Africa when he was going to work. He went to South Africa because he could not find work in India. When traveling through South Africa, Gandhi was also kicked out of a first class train because of his skin color. Then Gandhi started protesting against segregation. He decided then to become a political activist, so he could help change these unfair laws. He created a powerful, non-violent movement. During Gandhi's life, India was a colony of the British Empire, but wanted independence. He was a huge leader during that era and his thoughts helped catalyze the Indian independence movement.\nGandhi was a vegetarian almost all his life, because he believed in non-violence (ahimsa).\nAs an activist.\nOn 9 January, 1915 when Gandhi returned to India, he decided to again lead a march against a law called the Rowlatt Act. But then the protest turned violent and people started to kill the protesters.\nOn 12 March, 1930 Gandhi led the Salt March.\nWhen he returned to India, he helped cause India's independence from British rule, inspiring other colonial people to work for their own independence, break up the British Empire, and replace it with the Commonwealth.\nPeople of many different religions and ethnic groups lived in British India. Many people thought that the country should break into separate countries so that different groups could have their own countries. In particular, many people thought that Hindus and Muslims should have separate countries. Gandhi was a Hindu, but he liked ideas from many religions including Islam, Judaism and Christianity, and he thought that people of all religions should have the same rights, and could live together peacefully in the same country.\nIn 1938, Gandhi resigned from Congress. He said that he was no longer able to work through Congress to unite the divisions in caste and religion. He also felt that he had little to offer to the political process.\nOn 15 August, 1947, the British Indian Empire split into India and Pakistan. Gandhi wanted independence, but did not want the former Raj to split into two different countries. Instead of celebrating on independence day, he was crying over the end of British India.\nGandhi's principle of \"satyagraha\", often translated as \"way of truth\" or \"pursuit of truth\", has inspired other democratic and anti-racist activists like Martin Luther King, Jr. and Nelson Mandela. Gandhi often said that his values were simple, based upon traditional Hindu beliefs: truth (\"satya\"), and non-violence (\"ahimsa\").\nDeath.\nOn January 30, 1948 Mahatma Gandhi was shot dead by a Brahman activist Nathuram Godse, because Godse thought that Mahatma Gandhi was too respectful to the Muslims. Godse was tried and executed by Indian officials."}
{"id": "3581", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3581", "title": "Schizophrenia", "text": "Schizophrenia is a condition which may be diagnosed by a psychiatrist. It is mental illness where people may see, hear or believe things that are not real. It can be big problem for people who have it. Some similar mental illnesses include schizotypal personality disorder schizoaffective disorder and schizoid personality disorder. \nIt is a relatively common condition affecting one in 200 people. It is not infectious in any way. There is a danger that the sufferer may self-harm. Its cause is not exactly known. Very often it first appears in teenage years when the sufferer goes through puberty. There is no cure, but there is treatment which can help most of the sufferers.\nPeople with this disorder often do not behave the way most people do towards others. They also may not know what is real (this is called psychosis). Some common signs are strange beliefs, unclear or confused thinking and language, hallucinations (such as hearing voices that aren't there), poor interaction with others, less expression of feelings, and not doing much. They also may not care about many things.\nSchizophrenia is a chronic condition. As of 2021, there is no cure, but a combination of a therapy and certain drugs can allow most people suffering from it to lead a normal life. \nMeaning.\nThe word \"schizophrenia\" comes from two Greek words that mean \"to split\" and \"mind,\" because there is a 'split' between what's going on in the person's mind and what is actually happening. A person with schizophrenia does not change between different personalities: they have only one. The condition in which a person has more than one personality, meaning they act like a different person at different times, is dissociative identity disorder. There are no medical tests that can be used to say if a person has schizophrenia or not, so getting a diagnosis depends on which list of symptoms are used. It also depends on the doctor or psychologist who talks to the person. The lists of symptoms include wording like \"Disorganized [not organized, or oddly organized] speech present for a significant portion of time\". It is difficult to agree on what exactly \"disorganized speech\" is and how disorganized it has to be. It is also difficult to agree on how long a \"significant portion of time\" is. Because of this, two doctors or psychologists trying to make a diagnosis may often disagree. One will say that the person is schizophrenic and the other will say he or she is not.\nIs it schizophrenia?\nSchizophrenia has many different symptoms, and not everyone with schizophrenia has all of them. For this reason, some scientists think that schizophrenia is several separate illnesses that have some of the same symptoms. These scientists claim that the research done on schizophrenia is not accurate since different researchers mean different things when they use the word \"schizophrenia\" in scientific studies.\nMany medications (licensed drugs to cure or treat an illness) may also cause the same symptoms as schizophrenia. The most common ones are antidepressants (medicines to treat depression) and ADHD medication (medication to treat ADHD, a condition affecting the brain, including memory and focusing on surroundings.) If a person has taken anti-vomiting medication (medication to stop them being sick) for some time and suddenly stops, he or she may get schizophrenia symptoms. Hundreds of medications have schizophrenia symptoms as rare side effects (unintended effects of taking them). Illegal drugs such as LSD, amphetamines, magic mushrooms and cocaine may cause schizophrenia symptoms.\nMedical illnesses, and treatment with certain medicines, can cause symptoms very similar to that of schizophrenia. In fact, there are over a hundred medical problems that can cause the same symptoms of schizophrenia. For this reason, it is important to rule out the possibility of either of these things being the cause for the person's symptoms. For this reason, the person should have a thorough medical exam to rule out problems like;\nDelusions and hallucinations.\nPeople with schizophrenia often have delusions or hallucinations. A schizophrenic delusion is a belief that is very different from what other people with the same way of life believe. Hallucinations are usually experiences of hearing voices that don't exist. These voices often say unpleasant things to the person. Many people can hear voices like this without being schizophrenic, for instance right before falling asleep. This is called a hypnagogic hallucination. The brain cannot tell them apart from normal sounds that are heard. This is not yet fully understood by science.\nRisk factors.\nThere are many risk factors that may cause a person to develop schizophrenia. They include trauma (damage caused by stressful events) and genetics (schizophrenia running in families). Having a schizophrenic parent may be very stressful, and there may also be genes that influence the development of schizophrenia. It is very easy to show that trauma, such as sexual abuse (forced unwanted sexual behaviour towards somebody) increases the risk, but 40 years of searching for the right genes has not found anything that has been confirmed by independent research groups.\nHope.\nPeople with schizophrenia may also have other mental health disorders, like depression, anxiety and drug abuse. They often have problems functioning in society, and have difficulty keeping a job. However, there are a number of people with schizophrenia who get well and have earned college degrees and had professional careers. For example, Elyn. R. Saks successfully became a law professor at the University of Southern California and a published author.\nIn a family treatment called \"Open dialog\" in Finland, eight out of every ten people with schizophrenia \"get well.\" In developing countries, where doctors use less drugs, 2 out of 3 patients get well from schizophrenia. In western countries, where medications are used as treatment, 1 of 3 get well, but many suffer from drug side effects such as diabetes, obesity, and brain damage.\nTreatment.\nTreatment of schizophrenia may include medication to help treat the symptoms, different types of psychotherapy (therapy by a professional), such as cognitive-behavioral therapy and many rehabilitation therapies (therapies restoring things to how they were before), such as cognitive remediation therapy. Cognitive behavioral therapy, CBT, is a talk therapy that focuses on helping the person to think about their strange ideas (delusions) in more realistic ways.\nThe therapist may design a behavioral experiment for paranoia (false beliefs of danger) that will help the person to find out for example, if there really are cameras everywhere in the house. For hallucinations, cognitive therapy focuses on normalizing: many people hear voices without being stressed, and we all hear voices in the form of thoughts, it is just that people with schizophrenia hear them a bit more clearly than most people.\nOfficial guidelines.\nThe British national guidelines for treatment (NICE) suggest the following treatments:\nThe guidelines also warn against using more than one antipsychotic drug at the same time. Both for people who are at risk for getting schizophrenia and for people who have got it, they recommend cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and family therapy. Getting support from people who have become well from schizophrenia is also strongly recommended.\n In a family oriented treatment program in Finland, Open Dialog, 8 out of 10 people with schizophrenia get well with no medication or very limited drug use, often only with anxiety medication.\nSymptoms.\nThe symptoms of schizophrenia fall into three main categories: positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and cognitive symptoms.\nPositive symptoms are thoughts, behaviors, or anything experienced by the senses that are not shared by others - like hearing voices that are not really there. They are called 'positive' not because they are good but because they are \"added on\". These symptoms may include having strange thoughts that do not make sense (delusions), disorganized thoughts and speech, and feeling, hearing, seeing, smelling, or tasting things that do not exist (hallucinations). Positive symptoms often respond to drug treatment and cognitive behavioral therapy, CBT. Stopping anti-psychotic or anti-vomiting drugs too quickly may also cause these symptoms.\nNegative symptoms are thoughts, behaviors or emotions normally present in a healthy person that a person with a mental disorder has less of or may not have at all; they are 'minus' these. The sign for minus is -; it is also the sign for the word \"negative\". Negative symptoms includes a 'flat affect'; having a blank inexpressive look on the face and/or monosyllabic speech (speech always sounding the same) spoken in a slow monotone, few gestures, lack of interest in anything including other people, and an inability to act spontaneously or feel pleasure. These problems are also side effects of anti-psychoctic drugs. They may also be symptoms of many medical problems such as a metabolism that is too low.\nCognitive symptoms are problems with attention, certain types of memory, the concept of time, and with the ability to plan and organize. Cognitive deficits caused by schizophrenia can also be difficult to recognize as part of the disorder. They are the most disabling of the symptoms because cognitive problems affect everyday functioning. These problems may also be side effects of anti-psychotic drugs, antidepressants, sleeping medication and anti-anxiety drugs.\nCauses.\nA combination of what has happened to a person and the person\u2019s genes may play a role in the development of schizophrenia. People who have family members with schizophrenia and who experienced a brief period of psychotic symptoms have a 20 to 40 percent chance of being diagnosed one year later. This may be both the result of stressful events because of the family member and possibly a genetic effect.\nIt is difficult to know if schizophrenia is inherited because it is hard to find out whether something comes from genes or the environment. Those who have a parent, a brother or sister with schizophrenia have a higher risk of developing schizophrenia. The risk is even higher if you have an identical twin with schizophrenia. This may seem to show that schizophrenia is inherited. However, it may be the stress of living with a schizophrenic family member that is traumatic. Identical twins are much closer and are treated much more in the same way, and this may be the reason why one of them is more likely to get schizophrenia if the other has it. Dr Jay Joseph has found many problems with the scientific studies of inheriting schizophrenia, including false reporting of results. Joseph also claims that 40 years of the search for the schizophrenia gene has not found a single gene that independent research groups have confirmed.\nThere are may environmental risk factors factors for schizophrenia such as drug use, stress before birth and in some cases exposure to infectious diseases (a disease that spreads from person to person). In addition, living in a city during childhood or as an adult has been found to double the risk of schizophrenia . This is true even after taking into account drug use, race, and the size of one\u2019s social group. Other factors that play an important role include whether the person feels socially isolated, as well as social adversity, racial discrimination (treating a person badly because of their race), the person's family not working properly, unemployment, and poor housing conditions. There is evidence that childhood experiences of abuse or trauma are risk factors for developing schizophrenia later in life.\nSeveral drugs have been linked with the development of schizophrenia and the abuse (harmful use) of certain drugs can cause symptoms like those of schizophrenia. About half of those people who have schizophrenia use too much drugs or alcohol, possibly to deal with depression, anxiety, boredom, or loneliness. Frequent marijuana use may double the risk of serious mental illness, including schizophrenia.\nMore people with schizophrenia smoke than the general population; it is estimated that at least 60% to as many as 90% of people with schizophrenia smoke. Recent research suggests that cigarette smoking may be a risk factor for developing schizophrenia. Smoking also reduces the effects and side effects of anti-psychotic drugs, and this may be one of the reasons for the high smoking rate. Patients taking anti-psychotic drugs die up to 20 years earlier than others, possibly because the medication makes them overweight, gives diabetes and leads to them smoking.\nFactors such as lack of oxygen, infection, or stress and lack of healthy foods in the mother during pregnancy, might result in a slight increase in the risk of schizophrenia later in life. People who have schizophrenia are more likely to have been born in winter or spring (at least in the northern half of the world). This might relate to increased rates of exposures to viruses before birth. This difference is about 5 to 8 percent.\nSome people who have schizophrenia have differences in their brain structure compared to those who do not have the disorder. These differences are often in the parts of the brain that manage memory, organization, emotions, the control of impulsive behavior, and language. For example, there is less brain volume in the frontal cortex and temporal lobes, and problems within the corpus callosum, the band of nerve fibers which connects the left side and the right side of the brain. People with schizophrenia also tend to have larger lateral and third ventricles. The ventricles are spaces within the brain filled with cerebrospinal fluid.\nThe human brain has 100 billion neurons; each one of these neurons are connected to many other neurons. One neuron may have as many as 20,000 connections; there is between 100 trillion and 500 trillion neural connections in the adult human brain. There are many different parts or 'regions' of the brain. To complete a task - like recalling a memory - usually more than one region of the brain is involved, and they are connected by neural networks which is like the brain's wiring. It is believed that there are problems with the brain's wiring in schizophrenia.\nDiagnosis.\nThe DSM-IV-TR or the ICD-10 criteria are used to determine whether a person has schizophrenia. These criteria use the self-reported experiences of the person and reported abnormalities (unusual occurrences) in the behavior of the person, followed by a clinical assessment. A person can be determined to have the disease only if the symptoms are severe.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nThere are various medical conditions, other psychiatric conditions and drug abuse related reactions that may mimic the symptoms of schizophrenia (meaning they have some or all of the same symptoms). For example, delirium can cause visual hallucinations, or an unpredictable changing levels of consciousness. Schizophrenia occurs along with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a disorder in which a person becomes obsessed with certain ideas or actions. However, separating the obsessions of OCD from the delusions of schizophrenia can be difficult.\nPrevention.\nThere is no clear evidence that treating schizophrenia with anti-psychotic drugs early is effective. The British NICE guidelines recommend cognitive behavioural talk therapy for all people at risk. In recent research, 76 patients at risk for schizophrenia were divided into two groups. One group got omega3 for 3 months and the other got a dummy pill (food oil). After 12 months only 4.9% of the omega 3 group had got schizophrenia compared to 27.5% in the other group. There is some evidence which shows that early treatment with drugs improves short term outcomes for people who have a serious episode of mental illness. These measures show little benefit five years later. Attempting to prevent schizophrenia in the pre-onset phase with anti-psychotic drugs is of uncertain benefit and so is not recommended (as of 2009). Prevention is difficult because there is no reliable way to find out in advance who will get schizophrenia.\nManagement.\nThe treatment of schizophrenia is based upon the phase of the illness the person is in. There are three treatment phases:\nThere are some goals during the acute phase of treatment. Some of these goals are to prevent harm. To prevent harm, the person being treated will have the severity of psychosis and it's symptoms reduced. These symptoms include agitation, aggression, negative symptoms, self-disorder, and thought disorders. Another goal is to find and treat the things that led to the episode of psychosis. Then, the person will be treated by trying to go back to how they were before psychosis. Lastly, the person will be helped by forming social connections and finding out what treatment plans work for them. Some treatment plans can be for a long time, and others can be for a short time.\nThe stabilization phase also has goals. One is to reduce the stress the person feels. Another is to prevent the person from experiencing psychosis again. Then, the person is helped further with social connection and getting better. If the person has improved with a medication, it is recommended they keep taking it for at least 6 months.\nThe last phase of treatment is to make sure that the person is improving. If the treatment has bad side effects, it may be changed in this phase. Some treatments during this stage are psychotherapy and medication. Antipsychotic medications greatly reduce the risk of the person experiencing psychosis again. They are strongly recommended.\nMedication.\nThe first-line psychiatric treatment for schizophrenia is antipsychotic medication, which can reduce the positive symptoms in about seven to fourteen days. However, medication fails to improve negative symptoms or problems in thinking significantly. Many antipsychotics are Dopamine antagonists (a substance interfering with how another substance works.) High concentrations of Dopamine are thought to be the cause of hallucinations and delusions. For this reason blocking Dopamine reception helps against hallucinations and delusions.\nThe British national guidelines for treatment (NICE) suggest checking for reactions to traumatic experiences, deciding together with a doctor about using medication, taking into account the side effect risks of getting diabetes, becoming seriously overweight, getting brain damage (tardive dyskinesia, 5% risk per year), men growing breasts, and feelings described as inner torture (akathesia). The guidelines warn against using more than one antipsychotic drug at the same time.\nSome reviews of research sponsored by the makers of antipsychotic drugs claim that about 40 to 50 percent of people have a good response to medication, 30 to 40 percent have a partial response, and 20 percent have an unsatisfactory response (after 6 weeks on two or three different drugs). Other research from The British Journal of Psychiatry were more negative and claimed that \"the clinical relevance of antipsychotics is in fact limited\". This study included 22 428 patients and 11 antipsychotic drugs.\nA drug called clozapine is an effective treatment for people who respond poorly to other drugs, but clozapine can lower the white blood cell count in 1 to 4 percent of people who take it. This is a serious side effect.\nFor people who are unwilling or unable to take drugs regularly, injectable long-acting preparations of antipsychotics can be used. When used in combination with mental and social interventions (treatment), such preparations can help people to continue their treatment.\nPsychosocial therapies.\nNumerous mental and social interventions can be useful in treating schizophrenia. Such interventions include various types of therapy, community-based treatments, supported employment, skills training, token economic interventions, and mental interventions for drug or alcohol use and weight management. Family therapy or education, which addresses the whole family system of an individual, might reduce a return of symptoms or the need for hospitalizations (having to go into hospital.) There is growing evidence for the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy (also known as \u201ctalk therapy\u201d) .\nThe British national guidelines for treatment (NICE) recommend for both people are at risk of getting schizophrenia and people who have got it, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and family therapy. Getting support from people who have become well from schizophrenia is also strongly recommended.\n In a family oriented treatment program in Finland, Open Dialog, 8 out of 10 people with schizophrenia get well with no medication or very limited drug use, often only anxiety medication.\nOutlook.\nSchizophrenia has great human and economic costs. The condition results in a decreased life expectancy of 12 to 15 years, primarily because of its association with being overweight, not exercising, and smoking cigarettes. An increased rate of suicide (a person killing themself) plays a lesser role. These differences in life expectancy increased between the 1970s and 1990s.\nSchizophrenia is a major cause of disability, with active psychosis ranked as the third-most-disabling condition. Approximately three-fourths of people with schizophrenia have an ongoing disability with symptoms that keep coming back. Some people do recover completely and others function well in society. Most people with schizophrenia live independently, with community support. In people with a first episode of serious mental symptoms, 42 percent have a good long-term outcome, 35 percent have an intermediate outcome and 27 percent have a poor outcome. Outcomes for schizophrenia appear better in the developing world than in the developed world, although that conclusion has been questioned.\nThe suicide rate of people who have schizophrenia is estimated to be about 4.9 percent, most often occurring in the period following the first appearance of symptoms or the first hospital admission. 20 to 40 percent try to kill themselves at least once.\nSchizophrenia and smoking have shown a strong association in studies worldwide. Use of cigarettes is especially high in individuals who have schizophrenia, with estimates ranging from 80 to 90 percent of these people being regular smokers, compared to 20 percent of the general population. Those individuals who smoke tend to smoke heavily and to smoke cigarettes with a high nicotine content.\nResearch continues on schizophrenia. In the spring of 2013, genetics associations were shown between five major psychiatric disorders: autism, ADHD, bipolar disorder, depression, and schizophrenia per recent study. In the summer of 2013, for the first time, brain tissue development was replicated in three dimensions by scientists cloning a human \"mini-brain\" using stem cells. This could help with schizophrenia and autism neurological research (research related to the brain.) \nLikelihood.\nAs of 2011, schizophrenia affects around 0.3% to 0.7% of people, or 24 million people worldwide, at some point in their lives. More men are affected than women: the number of males with the disorder is 1.4 times greater than that of females. Schizophrenia usually appears earlier in men. For males the symptoms usually start from 20 to 28 years of age, and in females it is 26 to 32 years of age. Symptoms that start in childhood, middle or old age are much rarer. Despite the received wisdom that schizophrenia occurs at similar rates worldwide, its rate of likelihood varies across the world, within countries, and at the local level. The disorder causes approximately 1% of worldwide disability adjusted life years (in other words, years spent with a disability). The rate of schizophrenia varies depending on how it is defined.\nHistory.\nAccounts of a schizophrenia-like syndrome are rare before the 19th century. Detailed case reports from 1797 and 1809, are regarded as the earliest cases of the disorder. Schizophrenia was first described as a distinct syndrome affecting teenagers and young adults by B\u00e9n\u00e9dict Morel in 1853, termed \"d\u00e9mence pr\u00e9coce\" (literally 'early dementia'). The term dementia praecox was used in 1891 by Arnold Pick in a case report of a psychotic disorder. In 1893 Emil Kraepelin introduced a new distinction in the classification of mental disorders between \"dementia praecox\" and mood disorder (termed manic depression and including both unipolar and bipolar depression). Kraepelin believed that \"dementia praecox\" was primarily a disease of the brain, and a form of dementia, different from other forms of dementia such as Alzheimer's disease which usually happen later in life.\nEugen Bleuler coined the term \u201dschizophrenia\u201d, which translates roughly as \"split mind\", in 1908. The word was intended to describe the separation of functioning between personality, thinking, memory, and perception. Bleuler realized that the illness was not a dementia because some of his patients improved rather than got worse.\nIn the early 1970s, the criteria for determining schizophrenia were the subject of numerous controversies. Schizophrenia was diagnosed far more often in the United States than in Europe. This difference was partly the result of looser criteria for determining whether someone had the condition in the United States, where the DSM-II manual was used. In Europe, the ICD-9 manual was used. A 1972 study, published in the journal Science, concluded that the diagnosis of schizophrenia in the United States was often unreliable. These factors resulted in the publication of the DSM-III in 1980 with a stricter and more defined criteria for the diagnosis.\nSociety and culture.\nNegative social judgment has been identified as a major obstacle in the recovery of people who have schizophrenia.\nIn 2002, the term for schizophrenia in Japan was changed from \u201cSeishin-Bunretsu-By\u014d\u201d\u3000\u7cbe\u795e\u5206\u88c2\u75c5 (\u201cmind-split-disease\u201d) to \u201cT\u014dg\u014d-shitch\u014d-sh\u014d\u201d\u3000\u7d71\u5408\u5931\u8abf\u75c7 (\u201cintegration disorder\u201d), in an attempt to reduce feelings of shame or embarrassment. The idea that the disease is caused by multiple factors (not just one mental cause) inspired the new name. The change increased the percentage of people who were informed of the diagnosis from 37 percent to 70 percent over three years.\nIn the United States in 2002, the cost of schizophrenia, including direct costs (people who were not hospitalized, people who were hospitalized, medicines, and long-term care) and non-healthcare costs (law enforcement, reduced workplace productivity, and unemployment), was estimated to be $62.7 billion.\nThe book \u201cA Beautiful Mind\u201d and the film of the same name are about the life of John Forbes Nash, an American mathematician and Nobel Prize winner who has schizophrenia. The movie \u201cThe Soloist\u201d is based on the life of Nathaniel Ayers, a gifted musician who dropped out of the Julliard School, in New York City after the symptoms of schizophrenia began. He later became homeless in Los Angeles, California, in the notorious Skid Row section."}
{"id": "3584", "revid": "863768", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3584", "title": "Drink", "text": "A drink or beverage is a liquid that an organism can take into their body, by using their mouth. Typical drinks for humans include water, tea, milk, coffee, juice, soft drinks and alcoholic drinks. \nAll drinks are mainly water. All life needs water to live. If a living organism don't get enough water, they will dehydrate, and likely die. Plants take in water through their roots, which are underground. Most land animals get water by drinking."}
{"id": "3588", "revid": "3441", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3588", "title": "ASCII-art", "text": ""}
{"id": "3589", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3589", "title": "Need", "text": "A need is a thing that, when a living being, plant or animal does not have it, it is not able to live.\nA thing that someone wants to have, but is able to live when they do not have it, is called a want.\nEvery person has the same basic needs for the body.\nHumans have bodily needs of water, food, clothing, and shelter to live.\nThe need for water is the most important because a person will die very quickly when they do not have drinking water. In a warm place food is the next most important need.\nIn a cold place, the need for clothes or shelter may be next most important because a person will soon die when they do not have these. \nOther human needs are not so certain. They are mostly needs for the mind. It is often said that a person needs love, family, and friends. These needs are for personal relationships. They may also be wants. It is true that a life may be better with these things, but some friends can be bad, or bad sometimes. Good relationships can make life very happy. Thinking about a need that is not possible can make a person very unhappy.\nSome of the study of philosophy is about questions like \"What are the needs of a human?\"\nSome scientists study the needs of human or animal minds and bodies. The study of the mind is called psychology - \"words about the mind\". The study of bodily needs is part of medicine."}
{"id": "3590", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3590", "title": "Freeware", "text": "Freeware is software that people may get without paying for it. In this case, \"free\" means \"free of charge\". In freeware, users might not be allowed to customize or share the software or source code with others. This leaves the author with more control than with free software."}
{"id": "3591", "revid": "1096394", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3591", "title": "Yahoo!", "text": "Yahoo! is a web portal and an internet content and service provider. It is known for its many products and services, such as their search engine, e-mail, instant messaging, and video, but also contents their products in news, weather forecasting, money and other information. Yahoo! makes money from advertisements in their services. A Yahoo account can also be created by a Google account. Yahoo is launched on October 8, 1997.\nHistory and growth.\nEarly history (1994\u20131999).\nIn January 1994, Jerry Yang and David Filo were Electrical Engineering graduate students at Stanford University. In April 1994, \"Jerry and David's Guide to the World Wide Web\" was renamed \"Yahoo!\", for which the official is \"Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle\". Filo and Yang said they selected the name because they liked the word's general meaning, which comes from Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift: \"rude, and \". Its URL was akebono.stanford.edu/yahoo. Yang describes their selection of the name as \"We thought it fit well with what we were doing. It was irreverent. It was reflective of the Wild West nature of the Internet. A lot of people found it easy to remember, and besides, it's exactly what me and Jerry are. A couple of yahoos.\""}
{"id": "3592", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3592", "title": "Mecca", "text": "Mecca or Makkah (called Mecca in older texts, officially: Makkah al-Mukarramah; ) is a city in Saudi Arabia. As of the 2004 census, 1,294,169 people lived there. The city is inland from Jeddah, in the narrow sandy Valley of Abraham. It is above sea level. It is from the Red Sea. \nMecca is the holiest city in the Islamic world. Every year, millions of Muslims take a pilgrimage to Mecca, called the Hajj. They follow in the footsteps of Muhammad. All Muslims who are able to perform the Hajj are expected to do so at least once in their life. The Kaaba and Masjid al-Haram, are the holiest mosques in Islam. Mecca is closed to non-Muslims except for some journalists reporting on the Hajj.\nHistory.\nThe Kaaba, the small cubical building which Muslims pray towards is believed to have been built by Ibrahim and has been a religious center ever since. Muslims believed that God commanded Ibrahim to send his second wife Hajar and her son Ismail there. They found the Zamzam Well which led to people settling nearby, and thus Makkah was born. When Ismail was big enough, he helped his father to build the Kaaba. The Kaaba is the place towards which Muslims turn in prayer. This is known as the Qibla ."}
{"id": "3593", "revid": "7870373", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3593", "title": "Arabian Peninsula", "text": " \nThe Arabian Peninsula is a peninsula in Southwest Asia at the junction of Africa and Asia. It lies east of Ethiopia and northern Somalia; south of Israel, the Palestinian territories, and Jordan; and southwest of Iran. The waters around it are: on the southwest the Red Sea and Gulf of Aqaba; on the southeast the Arabian Sea; and on the northeast the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf. \nIt includes the countries of:\nThe majority of the population of the peninsula live in Saudi Arabia and Yemen. Northern Arabia has oil wells. Climate change and the scarcity of water is said to have affected this area. \nA prominent feature of the peninsula is desert. In the southwest there are mountain ranges which may get more rain than the rest of the peninsula. "}
{"id": "3594", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3594", "title": "Muslim world", "text": ""}
{"id": "3595", "revid": "7638148", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3595", "title": "South", "text": "South is one of the 4 cardinal directions on a compass. South is normally down on the bottom of most maps. For example: Angola is to the south of Nigeria, which is itself to the south of Morocco . The South Pole is the farthest south you can go."}
{"id": "3596", "revid": "7810996", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3596", "title": "Central America", "text": "Central America () is the central geographic region of the Americas and specifically part of the continent known as North America. It goes from Guatemala and Belize in the north-west, to Panama in the south-east. It is the area of land that sits south-east of Mexico and north-west of Colombia. It is between the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea.\nCentral America has an area of . It is almost 0.1% of the Earth's surface. This is a list of the countries in Central America, from the largest to the smallest:\nWhile Nicaragua is the largest country in area, of Central America, Guatemala has the largest population by country in Central America, with more than 14 million people and they also have the most populated city in Central America, being Guatemala City. \nSix of the seven countries have Spanish as their official language, with Belize being the non-Spanish speaking country, as their official language is English, although there are now at least 195,597 (62.8%) of people in Belize who speak Spanish.\nSome people also speak indigenous or creole languages like the Maya languages.\nCentral America has a density of 77 people per square kilometer.\nGeography.\nCentral America has an area of . It is almost 0.1% of the Earth's total surface. In 2009 the population was estimated at 41,739,000. It has a density of 77 people per square kilometer or 206 people per square mile.\nPhysical geography.\nCentral America has many unique features that go from the north-western borders of Belize and Guatemala to the Isthmus of Panama. There it connects to the Colombian Pacific Lowlands in South America.\nCentral America is an area of some 524,000 square kilometres. The Pacific Ocean is on the southwest, the Caribbean Sea to the northeast, and the Gulf of Mexico to the north. Most of Central America rests on the Caribbean Plate.\nThe region is geologically active. It has volcanic eruptions and earthquakes from time to time.\nThe 1976 Guatemala earthquake killed 23,001 people. Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, was devastated by earthquakes in 1931 and 1972. The last one killed about 5,001 people. Three earthquakes hit El Salvador. The first one in 1986 and two in 2001. An earthquake devastated northern and central Costa Rica in 2009. It killed at least 35 people. In Honduras a powerful earthquake happened in 2009.\nVolcanic eruptions are common. In 1968 the Arenal Volcano in Costa Rica erupted. This killed at least 87 people. The 3 villages of Tabacon, Pueblo Nuevo, and San Luis were buried under ash.\nCentral America has many mountain ranges; the longest are the Sierra Madre de Chiapas, the Cordillera Isabelia and the Cordillera de Talamanca. Most of the population of Honduras, Costa Rica and Guatemala live in valleys, between mountains. Valleys are also suitable for the production of coffee, beans and other crops.\nBiodiversity.\nCentral America is part of the Mesoamerican Biodiversity hotspot, boasting 7% of the world's biodiversity. As a bridge between North and South America, Central America has many species from the Nearctic and the Neotropic ecozones. However the southern countries (Costa Rica and Panama) of the region have more biodiversity than the northern countries (Guatemala and Belize), meanwhile the central countries (Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador) have least biodiversity. The table shows current statistics for the seven countries:"}
{"id": "3597", "revid": "73230", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3597", "title": "French language", "text": "French (French: \"\", pronounced \"Fronce-eh\") is a Romance language that was first spoken in France. It is also spoken in Belgium (Wallonia), Luxembourg, Quebec (Canada), Switzerland (Romandy) and many different countries in Africa (Francophone Africa). About 220 million people speak French as a native or a second language. It has also been one of the roots of other languages such as the Haitian Creole language. Like the other Romance languages, its nouns have genders that are divided into masculine (\"masculin\") and feminine (\"f\u00e9minin\") words.\nHistory.\nIn ancient times, the Celts lived in what is now France. In those days, the land was called Gaul (Latin: Gallia). The Romans conquered Gallia and divided it into provinces. Because the Romans spoke Latin, the local people learned Latin and began to speak it. Their own language, Gaulish, tended to be spoken less often, although Breton is a language still spoken today in the part of France called Brittany, that came from the old Celtic language.\nFrench pronunciation, more so than other Romance languages, became radically different from Latin. After the Roman Empire fell and Germanic peoples swarmed the countryside, Vulgar Latin was changing quickly. In medieval France it changed into two dialects or languages: \"langue d'oc\" and \"langue d'o\u00efl\". They both mean \"language of yes\", because \"oc\" was the word for \"yes\" in the south, and \"o\u00efl\" meant \"yes\" in the north. Today, the word for yes in French is \"oui\", pronounced like \"we\".\nIn 1635, France established the French Academy in order to standardize the French language. To this day, the academy establishes the rules for Standard French.\n\"Langue d'oc\" is now called Occitan, and it is still spoken by many people in Southern France.\nLetters.\nFrench uses the Latin alphabet, just like English. There are a few differences because vowels can have three types of diacritics added on to them. They are the acute accent \u00e9; grave accent \u00e8 and circumflex accent \u00ee. A cedilla can also be added onto a c to make \u00e7.\nConsonants.\nIf a word ends with a consonant, this will usually not be pronounced unless the next word starts with a vowel. However, if the word is very short or the last consonant is a c, r, l or f, this is still pronounced.\nExamples.\nHere are some examples of French words and sentences :\nMany French words are like English words, because English took many words from the Norman language, a dialect of French influenced by Old Norse. This is true even though scholars consider English to be a Germanic language, like German. For example, many English words ending with \"tion\", \"sion\", \"ible\", or \"able\" came from the French language. \nFrench and English have many cognates, which are words that look and sound similar because they come from the same . Here are some examples:"}
{"id": "3598", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3598", "title": "Prime minister", "text": "A prime minister manages the politics of a country and is the head of government. With countries that have kings and queens (known as monarchs), they are very important because they are in charge of most of the politics (they are \"head of the government\"). In countries with a president, they might be in charge of most of the politics (as in the Republic of Ireland), or they may be in day-to day charge, but taking orders from the president as in France. The opposite of a prime minister is a composite minister.\nCountries with a Prime Minister:"}
{"id": "3599", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3599", "title": "Greenland", "text": "Greenland is the world's largest island.\nGreenland is an autonomous territory of the kingdom of Denmark. This large Arctic island is near Iceland to the east and Canada to the west. It has a population of only 50,000 people, limited by its cold climate. Most of the civilian population lives in the southern part of the island, on the coasts. The capital of Greenland is Nuuk.\nThe island is democratic, with its own elections and a representative seat of government in Nuuk. It is part of the Kingdom of Denmark, a constitutional monarchy with Queen Margrethe II as head of state.\nThe island's Thule Air Base is under Danish control, but is administered by the United States Air Force.\nThe island is the least densely populated country in the world, with a density of 0.026 people per square kilometer. Antarctica is not counted because it is not an independent country and has no permanent inhabitants.\nThe ice sheet that covers Greenland may hide three separate islands, which have been joined by glaciers since the last geologic ice age.\nIn Greenland, there are no forests. In the south, at the coastal area, only some dwarf trees are found.\nHistory.\nGreenland has been inhabited at intervals over at least the last 4,500 years by Arctic peoples. They came from what is now Canada. Norsemen settled the uninhabited southern part of Greenland beginning in the 10th century, having previously settled Iceland.\nNorsemen would later set sail from Greenland and Iceland with Leif Erikson. They were the first known Europeans to reach North America. They did so nearly 500 years before Columbus reached the Caribbean islands. Inuit peoples arrived in Greenland in the 13th century. Though under continuous influence of Norway and Norwegians, Greenland was not formally under the Norwegian crown until 1261. Their colonies declined after the Black Death in the late 1400s. Denmark\u2013Norway, joined in alliance at the time, reclaimed sovereignty over the island in the 17th century. Greenland became Danish in 1814.\nLanguages.\nThe island is populated mostly by Inuit and Scandinavians who speak Greenlandic, an Eskimo-Aleut language. Danish is also spoken by most people. The national anthem of Greenland is Nunarput utoqqarsuanngoravit. Greenlandic became the sole official language in June 2009. However, it is the dialect of western Greenland, leaving other dialects to become less used and endangered. Danish is used in practice by professional people and by many of the Inuit population. English is taught in schools from the first year onwards.\nAdministrative divisions.\nUntil 2009, there were 20 communes in Greenland. Unless stated otherwise, they are in the district Kitaa:\nThis changed on January 1st, 2009, when these were merged into four large communes:\nIn addition, some parts of Greenland are outside a commune, namely:\nAs of January 1st, 2008, 218 people lived there.\nLandscape.\nThe island has many mountains. All of the cities are on the coast, because everywhere else is covered by a big layer of ice. The major cities are Nuuk, Sisimiut, Ilulissat, and Qaqortoq."}
{"id": "3600", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3600", "title": "Soviet Union", "text": "The Soviet Union (short for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or USSR) was a single-party Marxist\u2013Leninist state. It existed for 69 years, from 1922 until 1991. It was the first country to declare itself socialist and build towards a communist society. It was a union of 14 Soviet socialist republics and one Soviet federative socialist republic (Russia).\nThe Soviet Union was created about five years after the Russian Revolution. It was announced after Vladimir Lenin overthrew Alexander Kerensky as Russian leader. The communist government developed industry and over time became a major, powerful union. The largest country in the Union was Russia, and Kazakhstan was the second. The capital city of the Soviet Union was Moscow. The Soviet Union expanded its political control greatly after World War II. It took over the whole of Eastern Europe. Those countries were not made part of the Soviet Union, but they were controlled by the Soviet Union indirectly. These countries, like Poland, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany, were called satellite states.\nThe top-level committee which made the laws was the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union. In practice, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union was the leader and most important decision-maker in their system of government.\nAlthough the constitution said the Republics could leave the Union if they wanted, it was a completely centralized government, with no states' rights for the member countries.\nThe Union was formed with the idea to give everyone equal social and economic rights (equality). There was virtually no private property\u2014everything belonged to the state (public property was an idea discussed by Karl Marx, and formed the basis for socialism) 'Soviets', or workers' councils, were created by the working class to lead the socialist state democratically, but they soon lost power with the rise of Stalinism. The Union was successful in many fields, putting the first man and satellite into space and winning World War II alongside the United States and United Kingdom. However, its centralized government found innovation and change difficult to handle. The Union collapsed in 1991, partly due to the efforts at reform by its leader, Mikhail Gorbachev.\nRepublics of the Soviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union was made of 15 republics. These were either \"Soviet Socialist Republics\", or \"Soviet Socialist Federal Republics\". Each republic was independent and handled its own cultural affairs. Each also had the right to leave the union, which they did in 1991.\nThe \"Federal Republics\" were different in that they had more autonomy, and were made up of states themselves. These were often called \"Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics\". There were a number of them. Most of them still exist; though they are now republics, within the independent state. The \"Tatar ASSR\" turned into the \"Republic of Tatarstan\", for example (It is located around Kazan).\nGeography, climate and environment.\nThe Soviet Union at its largest size in 1991, with , was the world's biggest country. Covering a sixth of the world's lived in land, its size was comparable to North America's. The western part (in Europe) accounted for a quarter of the country's area, and was the country's cultural and economic center. The eastern part (in Asia) extended to the Pacific Ocean to the east and Afghanistan to the south, and was much less lived in than the western part. It was over across (11 time zones) and almost north to south. Its five climatic (different weather, temperature, humidity and atmospheric pressure) zones were tundra, taiga, steppes, desert, and mountains.\nThe Soviet Union had the world's longest border, measuring over in 1991. Two thirds of the Soviet border was coastline of the Arctic Ocean. Across the Bering Strait was the United States. The Soviet Union bordered Afghanistan, China, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Hungary, Iran, Mongolia, North Korea, Norway, Poland, Romania, and Turkey at the end of WWII.\nThe Soviet Union's longest river was the Irtysh. The Soviet Union's highest mountain was Communism Peak (today it is called the Ismail Samani Peak) in Tajikistan measured at . The world's largest lake, the Caspian Sea, was mostly in the Soviet Union. The world's deepest lake, Lake Baikal, was in the Soviet Union.\nHistory.\nThe last Russian Tsar (emperor), Nicholas II, ruled Russia until March 1917, when the Russian Empire was taken over and a short-lived \"provisional government\" replaced it, led by Alexander Kerensky and soon to be overthrown in November by Bolsheviks.\nFrom 1917 to 1922, the country that came before the Soviet Union was the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR), which was its own country, as were other Soviet republics at the time. The Soviet Union was officially created in December 1922 as the union of the Russian (also known as Bolshevist Russia), Ukrainian, Byelorussian, and Transcaucasian Soviet republics ruled by the communist Bolshevik parties.\nRevolution and the foundation.\nExtreme government-changing activity in the Russian Empire began with the Decembrist Revolt of 1825, and although serfdom was removed in 1861, its removal was achieved on terms unfavorable to the peasants (poor agricultural workers) and served to encourage changers (revolutionaries). A parliament (legislative assembly)\u2014the State Duma\u2014was created in 1906 after the Russian Revolution of 1905, but the Tsar protested people trying to move from absolute to constitutional monarchy. Rebellion continued and was aggravated during World War I by failure and food shortages in popular cities.\nA rebellion in Petrograd, in response to the wartime decay of Russia's economy and morale, caused the \"February Revolution\" and the removal of the government in March 1917. The tsarist autocracy was replaced by the Russian \"Provisional government\", whose leaders intended to have elections to Russian Constituent Assembly and to continue war on the side of the Entente in World War I.\nAt the same time, workers' councils, known as Soviets, sprang up across the country. The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, pushed for socialist revolution in the Soviets and on the streets. In November 1917, during the \"October Revolution\", they took power from the Provisional Government. In December, the Bolsheviks signed an armistice (peace) with the Central Powers. In March, after more fighting, the Soviets quit the war for good and signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.\nIn the long and bloody Russian Civil War, the new Soviet power won. The civil war between the Reds and the Whites started in 1917 and ended in 1923. It included the Siberian Intervention and other foreign interference, the killing of Nicholas II and his family and the famine in 1921, which killed about 5 million. In March 1921, during a related conflict with Poland, the Peace of Riga was signed and split disputed territories in Belarus and Ukraine between the Republic of Poland and Soviet Russia. The Soviet Union had to resolve similar conflicts with the newly established Republic of Finland, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia, and the Republic of Lithuania, which had all escaped the empire during the civil war.\nUnification of the Soviet Republics.\nOn 28 December 1922, people from the Russian SFSR, the Transcaucasian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR, and the Byelorussian SSR approved the Treaty of Creation of the USSR and the Declaration of the Creation of the USSR, creating the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. These two documents were made true by the 1st Congress of Soviets of the USSR and signed by heads of delegations.\nOn 1 February 1924, the USSR was accepted as a country by the British Empire. Also in 1924, a Soviet Constitution (set of laws) was approved, making true the December 1922 union of the Russian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the Belarusian SSR, and the Transcaucasian SFSR to form the \"Union of Soviet Socialist Republics\" (USSR).\nThe big changes of the economy, industry, and politics of the country began in the early days of Soviet power in 1917. A large part of this was performed according to Bolshevik Initial Decrees, documents of the Soviet government, signed by Vladimir Lenin. One of the most important and notable breakthroughs was the GOELRO plan, that planned a major change of the Soviet economy based on total electrification of the country. The Plan was developed in 1920 and covered a 10- to 15-year period. It included the making of a network of 30 regional power stations, including ten large hydroelectric power plants, and numerous electric-powered large industrial organizations. The Plan became the prototype for subsequent Five-Year Plans and was basically fulfilled by 1931.\nThe End\nStalin's rule.\nFrom its beginning years, government in the Soviet Union was ruled as a one-party state by the Communist Party (Bolsheviks). After the economic policy of War Communism during the Civil War, the Soviet government permitted some private enterprise to coexist with nationalized industry in the 1920s and total food requisition in the countryside was replaced by a food tax (\"see\" New Economic Policy).\nSoviet leaders argued that one-party rule was necessary because it ensured that 'capitalist exploitation' would not return to the Soviet Union and that the principles of Democratic Centralism would represent the people's will. Debate over the future of the economy provided the background for Soviet leaders to take more power in the years after Lenin's death in 1924. Initially, Lenin was to be replaced by a \"troika\" composed of Grigory Zinoviev of Ukraine, Lev Kamenev of Moscow, and Joseph Stalin of Georgia.\nStalin led the country through World War II and into the Cold War. Gulag camps greatly expanded to take a lot of prisoners. After he died, Georgy Malenkov continued his policies. Nikita Khrushchev reversed some of Stalin's policies,but Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin kept things as they were.\nAfter the 1936 revised constitution, the Soviet Union stopped acting as a union of republics and more as a single super-country.\nKhrushchev era.\nStalin died on 5 March 1953. Nikita Khrushchev eventually won the following power struggle by the mid-1950s. In 1956, he denounced Stalin's repression and eased controls over party and society. This was known as de-Stalinization.\nMoscow considered Eastern Europe to be a very vital buffer zone for the forward defense of its western borders. For this reason, the USSR sought to strengthen its control of the region. It did this by transforming the Eastern European countries into satellite states, dependent upon and obedient to its leadership. Soviet military force was used to suppress anti-Stalinist uprisings in Hungary and Poland in 1956.\nIn the late 1950s, a confrontation with China regarding the USSR's policies led to the Sino\u2013Soviet split. This resulted in a break throughout the global Marxist\u2013Leninist movement. The governments in Albania, Cambodia and Somalia chose to ally with China instead of the USSR.\nDuring this period of the late 1950s and early 1960s, the Soviet Union continued to make progress in the Space Race. It rivalled the United States. The USSR launched the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1 in 1957; a living dog named Laika in 1957; the first human being, Yuri Gagarin in 1961; the first woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova in 1963; Alexei Leonov, the first person to walk in space in 1965; the first soft landing on the Moon by spacecraft Luna 9 in 1966; and the first Moon rovers, Lunokhod 1 and Lunokhod 2.\nLeonid Brezhnev.\nLeonid Brezhnev led the Soviet Union from 1964 until his death in 1982. He came to power after he convinced the government to overthrow the then-leader Nikita Krushchev. Brezhnev's rule is often linked with the decline in Soviet economy and starting the chain of events that would lead to the union's eventual collapse. He had many self-awarded medals. He was awarded Hero of the Soviet Union (the highest honor) on three separate occasions. Brezhnev was succeeded by Yuri Andropov, who died a few years later. Andropov was succeeded by the frail and aging Konstantin Chernenko. Chernenko died a mere year after taking office.\nIn 1980 the Soviet Union hosted the Summer Olympics with Brezhnev opening and closing the games. The games were heavily boycotted by the western nations, particularly the United States. During the closing ceremony, the flag of the City of Los Angeles was raised instead of the flag of the United States (to symbolise the next host city/nation) and the anthem of the Olympics was played instead of the anthem of the United States in response to the boycott.\nBrezhnev was the second longest serving Soviet leader after Stalin. The following is a list of leaders (General Secretary of the Communist Party) in order of their tenure and length of leadership:\nKhrushchev and Gorbachev are the only Soviet leaders to have not died whilst in office. Lenin, Stalin and Khrushchev are the only leaders who were not (de jure) head of state during their leaderships.\nGorbachev's rule.\nMikhail Gorbachev was the Soviet Union's last leader. He was the only Soviet leader to have been born after the October revolution and was thus a product of the Soviet Union having grown up in it. He and US president Ronald Reagan signed a treaty to get rid of some nuclear weapons. Gorbachev started social and economic reforms that gave people freedom of speech; which allowed them to criticize the government and its policies. The ruling communist party lost its grip on the media and the people. Newspapers began printing the many failures that the Soviet Union had covered up and denied in its past. The Soviet Union's economy was lagging and the government was spending a lot of money on competing with the west.\nDissolution.\nBy the 1980s the Soviet economy was suffering but it was stable. Gorbachev's new ideas had gotten out of hand and the communist party lost control. Boris Yeltsin was elected (democratically) the President of the Russian SFSR even though Gorbachev did not want him to come into power. Lithuania announced its independence from the Union and the Soviet government demanded it surrender its independence or it would send the Red Army to keep order. Gorbachev invented the idea of keeping the Soviet Union together with each republic being more independent but under the same leader. He wanted to call it the 'Union of Soviet Sovereign Republics' to keep the Russian initials as CCCP (USSR in English).\nA group of communist leaders, unhappy with Gorbachev's idea, tried to take over Moscow and stop the Soviet Union from collapsing. It only made people want independence more. Although he survived the attempted takeover, he lost all of his power outside of Moscow. Russia declared independence in December 1991. Later in the month, leaders of Russia, Byelorussia, and Ukraine signed a treaty called the Belavezha Agreement to dissolve the USSR, extremely angering Gorbachev. He had no choice but to accept the treaty and resigned on Christmas Day 1991. The Soviet Union's parliament (Supreme Soviet) made the Belavezha Agreement law, marking formally the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The next day, the Soviet flag was lowered from the Kremlin for the last time.\nSince 2013, the document that confirmed the dissolution of the Soviet Union has been missing."}
{"id": "3601", "revid": "7757567", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3601", "title": "Monarch", "text": "A monarch is the ruler of a monarchy. Monarchs usually get their power by inheritance \u2013 from one of their parents. When a ruler dies their child, or nearest relative, takes over. A male monarch is usually called a king or emperor. A female monarch is usually called a queen or empress.\nMonarchs were very common in history until the 20th century. Most European countries had monarchs in past centuries, but no longer have them. Some countries that still have monarchs have other leaders that actually have the power. Most monarchies are hereditary monarchies. Some countries elect their monarch instead of using inheritance, like the Holy Roman Empire and Malaysia. Some republics, such as the Dutch Republic or North Korea, had or have a hereditary ruler but do not call him a \"monarch\".\nMonarchs can also have monarchs of lower honour below them, e.g. an empire could include several kingdoms, and a kingdom had several duchies or principalities, nations would rarely include all titles, usually going from duchy to kingdom instead of duchy to principality to kingdom. Prince/princess means 'ruler of a principality' and/or 'son of a king/queen'. Some other languages have separate words for them."}
{"id": "3604", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3604", "title": "Unit", "text": "Unit means part of something. It could mean a unit of measurement, or a unit in an army.\nUnits sometimes means the digit in a number on the right, which is also called the \"ones\".\nSome other ideas come from this word:\nFor example, a football team may be called \"X United\". This means that the town of X has come together to support the group. \nIn the BBC TV series Doctor Who, UNIT (UNified Intelligence Taskforce) is a military group on earth who battle invading aliens."}
{"id": "3607", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3607", "title": "Uncle", "text": "An uncle is a name used in an extended family. An uncle is either a brother of one of someone's parents. That person is the uncle's nephew (male) or niece (female). An uncle's child is a cousin. A (also written as great-uncle or grand-uncle) is the brother of a grandparent. In some cultures an uncle is considered a close family member. Based on the old Chinese saying \"the oldest son in the family is the father of the family\" an uncle is often the head of a family. In many cultures no single word (such as uncle) describes both their parents' brothers. Instead there are words to describe a person's kinship to their mother's brother or a person's kinship to their father's brother. An uncle can also be someone not related by blood or marriage as in a term of endearment or respect. In this use uncle can also be part of a nickname such as Uncle Sam. \n\"Avunculus\".\nDuring the Middle Ages in western Europe, a maternal uncle played a particular role in the family. A young man was often closer to his maternal uncle (from or \"little grandfather\") than to his own father. Tacitus noted the Franks had very strong ties between a maternal uncle and his nephew. In Roman family relationships the \"avunculus\" had a responsibility to defend his nephews as well as his nieces. The maternal uncle relationship was an extension of the Roman kin system's strong brother-sister relationship. \nVariation of terms.\nA maternal or paternal relative is one who is related through their mother or father, respectively. For example a maternal uncle is a the subject's mother's brother.An in-law is a relationship that is not by blood, but instead by marriage. The in-law shares the in-law relationships of the spouses relatives. For example a uncle in-law could be the husband of the subject's Aunt."}
{"id": "3608", "revid": "106", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3608", "title": "Shakespeare", "text": ""}
{"id": "3609", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3609", "title": "Information", "text": "The word \"information\" is used in many different ways. Originally, it comes from a word that meant to give a form to something. Information is something that people can learn, know about, or understand. For example, a newspaper contains information about the world. This article contains information about \"Information\".\nInformation in computer science.\nPeople who use computers often use the words \"information\" and \"data\" in the same way. There are special fields of study called \"information science\", \"information technology\" (IT), and data science.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, some people gave a new, specific meaning to \"information\". At that time, the first computer databases were built. In computer science, \"data\" often means a kind of information that has not been checked. That means \"data\" has not been changed or fixed, and you may not be able to trust it. With the new meaning, \"information\" means data that has been checked and passed tests for what it must be. A person can trust that \"information\" is correct.\nInformation can only be correct and good enough to trust if there are very good and complete ways to check the data (data checking, validation or verification) and decide it is good enough (acceptance process). A person must know rules were used to check the data or trust the person who checked the data. If a person cannot tell that this was done, the information still seems to be data for that person, so that person must check the data again, in that general view about data.\nThe Information Age is a historic period."}
{"id": "3610", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3610", "title": "Airport", "text": " An airport is a place where airplanes can land or take off. Most airports in the world have only a long strip of level ground called a runway. Many airports have buildings which are used to hold airplanes and passengers. A building that holds passengers waiting for their planes or luggage is called a terminal. The sections between planes and the terminal are called \"gates\". Airports also have buildings called hangars to hold planes when they are not used. Some airports have buildings to control the airport, like a control tower which tells planes where to go.\nAn international airport is a large airport that airplanes can use to fly to and from other countries. A domestic airport is an airport which is usually smaller and only has airplanes coming from different places in the same country. Most international airports have shops and restaurants for airplane passengers to use.\nAn airport used by the military is often called an air force base or airbase. An aircraft carrier is a floating airbase.\nSafety.\nAirports are made and operated for safety. Today, people must walk through a metal detector, a machine that can tell if metal goes through it. If it makes a noise, the officers will make that person take off all things on them that are metal. They also have X-ray machines that can look into luggage. If officers find items such as weapons, or anything that can be used to kill people, that item (and the person who has it) are taken away and possibly arrested. As well as this, passengers are not allowed to bring bottles or containers with over 100 ml of liquid onto the plane because they could be turned into bombs. Therefore, all water bottles must be emptied before entering the secured area."}
{"id": "3611", "revid": "7858241", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3611", "title": "Ice", "text": " \nIce is the common name for frozen water. Other liquids, such as ammonia or methane or milk could be called ice when they freeze but they are called 'milk ice', for instance, instead of just 'ice'. Liquid water becomes solid ice when it is very cold. The freezing point is 0\u00b0 Celsius (32\u00b0 Fahrenheit or 273 kelvin).\nIce is commonly made in a home refrigerator or freezer. If water is put in a freezer and left for a while, the water gets very cold and will freeze solid, creating ice. Water can be placed into a copper (or other metal) container to cause it freeze into ice faster. Metals are good conductors of heat, so water can freeze faster than in a plastic ice tray.\nHow ice is formed.\nUnlike other liquids, water expands as it freezes to become ice; so ice floats on water because ice has less density than water. This is very unusual - just about every other liquid gets more dense as it cools; water ice, however, is an important exception. Liquid water expands by about 9% as it becomes ice - it takes up more space. This is because the water molecules are actually farther apart instead of being closer together. The molecules in an ice crystal are arranged in a way that makes it less dense than liquid water.\nIf water in plumbing freezes, it can burst the water pipe. Water in glass bottles can make them explode when it freezes. Water freezing in rock cracks can expand enough to split hard rocks apart; this is an important geological weathering process that can wear down mountains and make rock into soil.\nWhen materials are cooled their molecules vibrate less and compact together. When most materials reach a temperature called the freezing point, the molecules form a crystalline solid - although some materials (like glass and tar) do not crystallise at all but form super stiff fluids, which seem to be solid. Only Helium will not freeze; all other substances will freeze if cold enough, but fluids like cooking oil, antifreeze, petrol (gasoline), nitrogen, etc. freeze at temperatures that most people don't experience.\nSalt water.\nSalt water needs a lower temperature to freeze than pure water. The resulting ice contains much less salt than the salt water it came from. This fact has sometimes been used for desalination. Salty ice is not as strong as frozen pure water. Similarly spreading salt on ice melts it, if it's not too cold: the salt progressively eats into the ice, forming brine which does not freeze at that temperature.\nGeographical locations of ice.\nBecause ice floats, even large bodies of water that freeze, like some oceans, only form ice on the surface. Most lakes never freeze to the bottom. Even the coldest oceans, like the Arctic Ocean, only freeze on the top, leaving liquid ocean circulating below. Because of this the Earth's oceans are able to redistribute heat and the climate of the earth has less extremes of heat and cold than it would otherwise. If ice were to sink instead of float, the oceans would fill with ice from the bottom, would remain solid and only some of the top would melt. A solid ocean would not circulate heat. But because ice floats on the surface the water beneath can continue to circulate and the ice on the surface stays exposed and readily melts when the temperature rises. \nBig bodies of ice on land are called glaciers. Antarctica has the majority of the world's ice.\nIce ages.\nClimate change happens all the time. When it is very cold it is called an ice age. During ice ages very large areas of the earth are covered in ice, snow and glaciers. The causes of ice ages are complex, and not entirely known. Global warming is currently affecting the Earth's ice resources and its causes are also very complex.\nDry ice.\nThere is also 'dry ice'; it is frozen carbon dioxide. Dry ice exposed to normal air gives off carbon dioxide gas that is odorless and colorless. The gas is so cold that when it mixes with air it cools the water vapour in the air to fog, which looks like a thick white smoke. It is often used in the theatre to make fake fog or smoke."}
{"id": "3614", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3614", "title": "Travel", "text": "Travel is the activity of going from one place to another place. When a person makes the same trip every day to work or school, this type of travelling is usually called \"commuting.\" Some people travel to other cities as part of their job. This is called \"business travel.\" When many people travel to a distant place to stay, it is called \"human migration\". \nSome people travel on their vacation, to visit other towns, cities, or countries. This is tourism. These people stay overnight in hotels, hostels, motels, apartments or bed and breakfast. Some prefer camping. Through the centuries, modes of travel have changed. Some people (travel writers) write about travelling in books including autobiographies or journals.\nTypes of travelling:"}
{"id": "3615", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3615", "title": "CNN", "text": "The Cable News Network (CNN) is an American cable news television channel. It was founded in 1980 by Ted Turner. The Cable News Network first aired on television on June 1, 1980. The Cable News Network's first newscast was anchored (hosted) by David Walker and his wife Lois Hart. In its first year CNN hired many political analysts, including Rowland Evans and Robert Novak. On January 1, 1982 CNN launched a 24-hour sister newscast channel with no talk shows or commentary shows called CNN2. CNN broadcasts programs from its headquarters at the CNN Center in Atlanta, or from the Time Warner Center in New York City, or from studios in Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles. CNN is owned by Time Warner, and the U.S. news channel is a part of the Turner Broadcasting System.\nShows.\nThe hosts of its opinion shows are Don Lemon, Chris Cuomo, Fredricka Whitfield, Erin Burnett, Brianna Keiler and Brooke Baldwin.\nCNN has been criticized by the right-wing Media Research Center for having a left-wing bias. According to that same Center, it is less to the left than the news divisions of ABC, NBC, and CBS. It has been criticized by Arabs for having a pro-American bias."}
{"id": "3616", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3616", "title": "Leader", "text": "A leader is somebody whom people follow. A leader has authority. For people to accept a leader, his or her leadership must therefore be legitimate. \nBecause people follow a leader, the leader can make people do things. A leader can therefore make people work together towards a common goal. \nAn example of a leader is the head of government of a country. People within the government \"follow\" the leader, and citizens look to the head of government for inspiration and guidance. Sometimes, when a head of government lacks legitimacy, people will stop following him or her. The head of government is therefore no longer able to lead properly. This may result in a new election, or in worst case civil war.\nA group with no leader is called leaderless. "}
{"id": "3617", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3617", "title": "Blackboard", "text": "A blackboard, also called a chalkboard, is a surface on which chalk is visible. It is used as a surface to write on. It is usually made up of wood or fiber. It is painted black to reflect the white chalks.\nBlackboards are often used to help in teaching in school. Blackboards are not used as much now but can be seen in some schools still. The chalk dust got everywhere, and some people are allergic to chalk dust. Now people use whiteboards: they can take modern felt-tip colour markers, and clean easily. \nSchoolteachers often use the chalkboard to display things at large. It also makes the learning cooperative between teachers and student. Chalkboards can be black or dark green, in which case they may be called blackboards and greenboards."}
{"id": "3620", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3620", "title": "Linux", "text": "Linux or GNU/Linux is a Unix-like operating system (or strictly family of) for computers. An operating system is a collection of the basic instructions that manage the electronic parts of the computer allowing running applications/programs. Linux kernel (the basis of the operating system) is free software, meaning everyone has the freedom to use it, see how it works, change it, or share it.\nThere is a lot of software for Linux and\u2014like Linux itself\u2014a lot of the software for Linux is free software. This is one reason why many people like to use Linux.\nThe defining component of Linux is the Linux kernel, an operating system kernel that Linus Torvalds developed, at first alone. Linux is typically packaged in a Linux distribution (or \"distro\" for short). Distributions also include supporting system software and libraries, many of which are provided by the GNU Project.\nPopular Linux distributions include Debian, Fedora, and Ubuntu. Commercial distributions include Red Hat Enterprise Linux and SUSE Linux Enterprise Server. Desktop Linux distributions include a windowing system such as X11 or Wayland, and a desktop environment such as GNOME or KDE Plasma. Distributions intended for servers may omit graphics altogether, and include a solution stack such as LAMP. Because Linux is freely redistributable, anyone may create a distribution for any purpose.\nLinux was originally developed for personal computers. Linux is the leading operating system on servers such as mainframe computers, and the only O.S. used on supercomputers (at least on the TOP500 list, since November 2017). It is used by around 2.3% of desktop computers. The Chromebook, which runs the Linux kernel-based Chrome OS, dominates the US K\u201312 education market and represents nearly 20% of sub-$300 notebook sales in the U.S.\nLinux also runs on embedded systems, which are devices whose operating system is typically built into the firmware and is highly tailored to the system; this includes mobile phones (especially smartphones), tablet computers, network routers, facility automation controls, televisions, digital video recorders, video game consoles and smartwatches. In fact, the Android operating system, a mobile operating system built on top of the Linux kernel, has the largest installed base of all general-purpose operating systems. In March 2017, it was reported that there were more users on Android than on Microsoft Windows, which is not based on Linux.\nLinux is one of the most prominent examples of free and open-source software collaboration. The source code may be used, modified and distributed\u2014commercially or non-commercially\u2014by anyone under the terms of its respective licenses, such as the GNU General Public License.\nHow Linux was made.\nIn the 1980s, many people liked to use an operating system called Unix. But because it restricted the user from sharing and improving the system, some people made a new operating system that would work like Unix but which anybody could share or improve. MINIX, similar to Unix, was used as a teaching tool for university students to learn how operating systems worked. MINIX also restricted its sharing and improvement by its users.\nA group of people called the GNU Project wrote different parts of a new operating system called G.N.U., but it did not have all the parts an operating system needs to work. In 1991 Linus Torvalds began to work on a replacement for MINIX that would be free to use, and which would not cost anything. Linus started the project when he was attending the University of Helsinki. This eventually became the Linux kernel.\nLinus Torvalds shared the Linux kernel on some internet groups for MINIX users. Linus first called the operating system \"Freax\". The name Freax came from joining up the English words \"free\" and \"freak\", and adding an X to the name because Unix has an X in its name. Ari Lemmke, who worked with Linus at the University, was responsible for the servers that Freax was stored on. Ari did not think Freax was a good name, so he called the project \"Linux\" without asking Linus. Later, Linus agreed that Linux was a better name for his project.\nLinux relied on software code from MINIX at first. But, with code from the G.N.U. system available for free, he decided it would be good for Linux if it could use that code, instead of code from MINIX, because MINIX did not let people share or change it how they wanted. The G.N.U. General Public License is a software license that lets people change any part of the code they want to, as long as they share any changes they make with the people they give their software to and allow them to redistribute it for free or for a price . The software from G.N.U. was all licensed under the G.N.U. General Public License, so Linus and the other people who worked on Linux could use it too.\nTo make the Linux kernel suitable for use with the code from the G.N.U. Project, Linus Torvalds started a switch from his original license (which did not allow people to sell it) to the G.N.U. GPL. Linux and G.N.U. developers worked together to integrate G.N.U. code with Linux to make a free operating system.\nSince 1991, thousands of programmers and companies have worked to make Linux better including Google.\nTux the penguin.\nThe mascot of Linux is a cartoon penguin named \"Tux\". When a person sees the penguin on software and hardware, it means that it will work with Linux, and sometimes all systems that are like Unix.\nThe idea of the penguin came from the creator of Linux, Linus Torvalds. The image was made by a man named Larry Ewing in a competition to create a logo. The image, Tux, did not win, but it was picked as a mascot later.\nTux has now become a symbol for Linux, and sometimes even for open source. He can be seen in many different places and often, when people refer to Linux, they often think about Tux. Tux has even been included in many video games, such as Super Tux (like Super Mario Bros.), Tux Racer (where players race Tux down an icy hill) and Pingus (like Lemmings).\nUses.\nDesktop use.\nAlthough there are only a few Linux versions for some Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows programs in areas like desktop publishing and professional audio and video there are programs that are comparatively similar in quality compared to those available for Mac and Windows.\nMany free software programs that are popular on Windows, such as Pidgin, Mozilla Firefox, LibreOffice, Chromium, VLC and GIMP, are available for Linux. A growing amount of proprietary desktop software can also be used under Linux, such as Adobe Flash Player, Spotify and Skype. CrossOver is a proprietary solution based on the open source Wine project that supports running Windows applications such as Microsoft Office and Adobe Photoshop under Linux.\nServers and supercomputers.\nLinux has mainly been used as a server operating system, and has risen to be known by a lot of people in that area; Netcraft reported in February 2008 that five of the ten best internet hosting companies run Linux on their web servers. This is because of its stability and uptime, and the fact that desktop software with a graphical user interface for servers is often unneeded.\nLinux is commonly used as an operating system for supercomputers. As of November 2017, all of the top 500 fastest supercomputers run Linux.\nPronunciation.\nIn 1992, Torvalds explained how he pronounces the word \"Linux\":\nTorvalds has made available an audio sample which indicates his own pronunciation, in English and Swedish.\nSome English speakers pronounce the name as lee-narks or lee-nix or lie-nix. According to Torvalds, that is incorrect pronunciation. \nCode size.\nA 2001 study of Red Hat Linux 7.1 found this distribution had 30 million lines of code. The study showed that Red Hat 7.1 required about 8,000 years of time to develop. The study also said that if all this software had been made by proprietary means, it would have cost about $1.08 billion to make in the United States. As of March 7, 2011, Linux kernel would cost about $3 billion.\nVersion 3.10 of the Linux kernel, released in June 2013, has 15 million lines of code,\u00a0while the version 4.1, released in June 2015, has grown to over 19.5 million lines of code by almost 14,000 programmers.\nMost of the code (around 71%) was written in the C programming language, and many other languages were used, including C++, assembly language, Perl, Python, Fortran, and various shell scripting languages. A little more than half of all lines of code were licensed under the GPL.\nDifferent Linux versions.\nPeople who want to get Linux can download it from a website on the internet or buy it from a store. Sometimes books and magazines about Linux have a CD. or DVD. with Linux on it. Any certain version of Linux is called a \"distribution\", or \"distro\". A Linux version has the Linux kernel, G.N.U. software, and some extra programs that might not be a part of G.N.U. Different versions include different extra programs. The versions used by the most people include:\nPeople might pay some money for a version, so they can have a CD-ROM or DVD and to help the company to make their versions better. Usually when someone pays, it is so the company will help the user after they install it, which is called \"support\".\nSoftware for Linux includes:\nLicensing, trademark, and naming.\nThe Linux kernel and most GNU software are licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL). The GPL requires that anyone who distributes the Linux kernel must make the source code (and any modifications) available to the recipient under the same terms. In 1997, Linus Torvalds said, \"Making Linux GPL'd was definitely the best thing I ever did\". Other key components of a Linux system may use other licenses; many libraries use the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL), a type of the GPL that is less restricted, and the X Window System uses the MIT License. \"Linux\" is a trademark of Linus Torvalds."}
{"id": "3621", "revid": "1084742", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3621", "title": "Open source", "text": "Open source is a software similar to free software, but is more related to business. It is different from other software because the source code is available to everyone. The source code is a set of instructions for the computer, written in a programming language.\nAnyone can see how the source code works and can change it if they want to make it work differently. The opposite of open source is closed source. Closed source software is not available to everyone. Open source has a lot in common with free software but each has its own focus and goals.\nOpen source and free software have been around for decades. They became more popular with the Linux and BSD software communities. To protect the code, a special user license is used. The most common kinds of licence are the GPL, BSD and LGPL. Wikipedia uses open source too. The Open Source Movement is led by the Open Source Initiative.\nThe open source movement became separate from the free software movement in 1998."}
{"id": "3622", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3622", "title": "Desktop environment", "text": "In graphical user interfaces and consoles a desktop environment is a location on a personal computer that helps the user get around on the computer. The desktop itself is a place in the operating system used for short cuts to computer files and folders on the hard drive. Computer icons (small pictures) are used to represent files/folders. Clicking these icons will open or start a folder or program. The desktop is the area where the start menu is if the computer has a start menu.\nUsually the desktop is the main screen on the computer. If no programs or folders are open, the computer will display the desktop.\nThe most common desktop environment on personal computers is the one given by Microsoft Windows; another common environment is the one given by Apple Mac OS X. Other mostly-used desktop environments for Unix-like operating systems using the X Window System are KDE, GNOME, Xfce. There are also other desktop environments, including : Aston, EDE, GEM, IRIX Interactive Desktop, Sun's Java Desktop System, Mezzo, Project Looking Glass, ROX Desktop, UDE, Xito, XFast."}
{"id": "3624", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3624", "title": "OpenOffice", "text": "Apache OpenOffice (formerly OpenOffice.org) is a free open source office suite. The free software project was formerly hosted by Sun Microsystems and then Oracle Corporation and is currently hosted by Apache. It is available for many different operating systems, including Microsoft Windows, Linux, OS X, FreeBSD and Solaris; and is meant to be an alternative to Microsoft Office. It supports Microsoft Office file formats as well as its own OpenDocument format.\nThe \".org\" part of the previous name OpenOffice.org is there because OpenOffice is already trademarked. It is often called \"OOo\" for short.\nOpenOffice is based on the older StarOffice software that was created by Sun Microsystems.\nParts.\nOpenOffice is a collection of applications that work together closely to provide the features expected from a modern office suite. Many of the parts are designed to be alternatives to those available in Microsoft Office. The parts available include:"}
{"id": "3625", "revid": "373511", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3625", "title": "Download", "text": "Download means getting information from another computer or server. The opposite of downloading is uploading, which is sending data to another computer. Usually we do not say \"download\" for a single web page (for example when you open this page on your computer). When we say we downloaded something, it is normally a bigger computer file, like data or a computer program.\nThe word downloadable means the ability to get information or data from an owner for one's use. The source is expected to be authentic and have the right to send it. At the user's end, the downloaded information or data are to be used based on agreement notice.\nIn the 21st century, it is very easy to download files or informations - legally or not - from the internet.\nSideload.\nAs most non-technical users use the word download to talk about any data transfer, the word \"sideload\" is sometimes used for local to local transfers as distinct from distant ones."}
{"id": "3628", "revid": "7482262", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3628", "title": "GNOME", "text": "GNOME is a computer desktop environment. It was designed for Linux, but many other operating systems can use it too. GNOME aims to provide an easy way to use a computer. GNOME is a free software project. It was made because people were questioning whether KDE is free. GNOME is part of the GNU project.\nAims.\nAccording to the GNOME website:\nThe GNOME project puts heavy emphasis on simplicity, usability, and making things \u201cjust work\u201d (see \"KISS principle\"). The other aims of the project are:\nApplications.\nGNOME has many applications written for it. Some of them include:"}
{"id": "3632", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3632", "title": "Dog", "text": "Dogs (\"Canis lupus familiaris\") are domesticated mammals, not natural wild animals. They were originally bred from wolves. They have been bred by humans for a long time, and were the first animals ever to be domesticated. There are different studies that suggest that this happened between 15.000 and 100.000 years before our time. The dingo is also a dog, but many dingos have become wild animals again and live independently of humans in the range where they occur (parts of Australia).\nToday, some dogs are used as pets, others are used to help humans do their work. They are a popular pet because they are usually playful, friendly, loyal and listen to humans. Thirty million dogs in the United States are registered as pets. Dogs eat both meat and vegetables, often mixed together and sold in stores as dog food. Dogs often have jobs, including as police dogs, army dogs, assistance dogs, fire dogs, messenger dogs, hunting dogs, herding dogs, or rescue dogs.\nThey are sometimes called \"canines\" from the Latin word for dog - \"canis\". Sometimes people also use \"dog\" to describe other canids, such as wolves. A baby dog is called a pup or puppy. A dog is called a puppy until it is about one year old.\nDogs are sometimes referred to as \"man's best friend\" because they are kept as domestic pets and are usually loyal and like being around humans. Dogs like to be petted, but only when they can first see the petter's hand before petting; one should never pet a dog from behind.\nAugust 26 is National Dog Day. While March 26 is National Puppy Day.\nAppearance and behaviour.\nDogs have four legs and make a \"bark,\" \"woof,\" or \"arf\" sound. Dogs often chase cats, and most dogs will fetch a ball or stick.\nDogs can smell and hear better than humans, but cannot see well in color because they are color blind. Due to the anatomy of the eye, dogs can see better in dim light than humans. They also have a wider field of vision.\nLike wolves, wild dogs travel in groups called packs. Packs of dogs are ordered by rank, and dogs with low rank will submit to other dogs with higher rank. The highest ranked dog is called the alpha male. A dog in a group helps and cares for others. Domesticated dogs often view their owner as the alpha male.\nLifespan.\nDifferent dog breeds have different lifespans. In general, smaller dogs live longer than bigger ones. The size and the breed of the dog change how long the dog lives, on average. Breeds such as the Dachshund usually live for fifteen years, Chihuahuas can reach age twenty. The Great Dane, on the other hand has an average lifespan of six to eight years; some Great Danes have lived for ten years.\nOrigin of dogs.\nAll dogs are descended from wolves, by domestication and artificial selection. This is known because DNA genome analysis has been done to discover this. They have been bred by humans. The earliest known fossil of a domestic dog is from 31,700 years ago in Belgium. Dogs have lived with people for at least 30,000 years. In 2013, a study was published that showed that the skull and teeth of a canid, dated to 33,000 years ago, had characteristics closer to a dog than to a wolf, and the authors conclude that \"this specimen may represent a dog in the very early stages of domestication, i.e. an \u201cincipient\u201d dog.\" The researchers go on to suggest that it was, however, a line that did not lead to modern dogs. Genetically, this material is closer to that of a modern dog than to that of a wolf. Other signs of domestication are that sometimes, dogs were buried together with humans. Evidence of this is a tomb in Bonn, where a man of about 50 years of age, a woman of about 25 years of age, the remains of a dog, plus other artifacts were found. Radiocarbon dating showed that the human bones were between 13.300 and 14.000 years old.\nDogs and humans.\nDogs are often called \"man's best friend\" because they fit in with human life. Man refers to humankind and not just guys (Old English). Dogs can serve people in many ways. For example, there are guard dogs, hunting dogs, herding dogs, guide dogs for blind people, and police dogs. There are also dogs that are trained to smell for diseases in the human body or to find bombs or illegal drugs. These dogs sometimes help police in airports or other areas. Sniffer dogs (usually beagles) are sometimes trained for this job. Dogs have even been sent by Russians into outer space, a few years before any human being. The first dog sent up was named Laika, but she died within a few hours.\nDog breeds.\nThere are at least 800 breeds (kinds) of dogs. Dogs whose parents were the same breed will also be that breed: these dogs are called purebred or pure pedigree dogs. Dogs with parents from different breeds no longer belong to one breed: they are called \"mutts\", \"mixed-breed dogs\", \"hybrids\", or \"mongrels\". Some of the most popular breeds are sheepdogs, collies, poodles and retrievers. It is becoming popular to breed together two different breeds of dogs and call the new dog's breed a name that is a mixture of the parents' breeds' two names. A puppy with a poodle and a pomeranian as parents might be called a Pomapoo. These kinds of dogs, instead of being called mutts, are known as designer dog breeds. These dogs are normally used for prize shows and designer shows.\nThey can be guide dogs."}
{"id": "3634", "revid": "344", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3634", "title": "Blind", "text": ""}
{"id": "3635", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3635", "title": "Blindness", "text": "Blindness is to not see anything. Some people are called blind, even though they can see a little bit. This is because they cannot see clearly, but only see unfocused shapes or colors. \nIn modern countries, few young people are blind. In all the world, blindness is mostly caused by malnutrition and diseases of old people, like cataracts and trachoma. People can become blind because of diseases or accidents, but sometimes people are born blind.\nSome people are \"color blind\", which means they can see, but cannot tell certain colors apart. \nWhen people are blind they use such things as the alphabet in \"braille\" and \"guide dogs\" to do every day life things. \nFamous blind people have included Louis Braille, the inventor of the braille alphabet, Stevie Wonder, Ray Charles and Helen Keller. "}
{"id": "3636", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3636", "title": "Dutton Speedwords", "text": ""}
{"id": "3637", "revid": "1060576", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3637", "title": "Arctic", "text": "The Arctic is the area around the Earth's North Pole. The Arctic includes parts of Russia, Alaska, Canada, Greenland, Lapland and Svalbard as well as the Arctic Ocean. It is an ocean, mostly covered with ice. Most scientists call the area north of the treeline Arctic. Trees will not grow when the temperatures get too cold. The forests of the continents stop when they get too far north or too high up a mountain. (Higher places are colder, too.) The place where in the trees stop is called the tree line.\nThe area north of the treeline is not an empty ice field. In fact, the only large ice-covered land is central Greenland, which is covered year-round by a continental glacier. The land of the Arctic is around the edges of the Arctic Circle and is usually covered with tundra. A tundra is a cold, almost treeless plain covered with moss and grasslike plants called \"sedges\".\nTundras do not get very much rain or snow. However, they are very wet in the summer time because, three feet (1m) or so below the surface, the ground is always frozen. This permafrost is a layer of ice with the hardness of stone that keeps water from soaking into the earth beneath it. Permafrost can be thousands of feet thick. In the summer the ground on top thaws out when the sun shines and the snow that did fall melts. But the melted snow cannot drain into the ground; it just soaks the topsoil. There is no place for the water to go, except to form lakes and puddles on top of the ground until it freezes again or dries up.\nIn the Arctic, during summer there are nights when the Sun never sets. This is because during summer there, the North Pole points toward the Sun. So, sometimes people call it the Land of the Midnight Sun.\nThe word comes from the Greek word \"\u03b1\u03c1\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2\", meaning \"bear\". The North Pole aims at the stars called the Great Bear and the Little Bear. This is why it is called the Arctic.\nPlant life.\nIn some parts of the Arctic the ground is covered with bright-colored flowers during the short summer. These little plants have very short stems. They must stay close to the ground, because the earth is warmer than the biting winds that blow above it. Even some rocks have plants growing on them. These rock plants are called lichens. Lichens will grow on the bare rocks. Yellow reindeer moss is really a lichen. It grows slowly, but often grows over six inches (15\u00a0cm) tall. It is spongy and full of water. This plant is the summer food for reindeer.\nTrees are rare on the tundra. Only in the protected valleys or along the riverbanks are small trees able to grow. Rivers come into the Arctic from the warmer south. The places along their banks are a little bit warmer than the rest of the tundra, and trees can grow there. Otherwise only a few clusters of bushes grow sparingly. Berries are the only fruit that grows in the Arctic.\nEach summer the ice and snow melt, allowing the animals to find food and the plants to flower. The moisture from the snow stays toward the top of the ground's surface. Plant roots can use it for their growth. Even so, in many places the soil is too poor for plant's growth. Less than half of the tundra has plants growing on it.\nAnimal life.\nThe polar bear is the world's largest meat-eating land animal. Polar bears are well adapted to hunt seals out on the ice. They are excellent swimmers, and the coldest water does not bother them. They wait by breathing holes if they pick up the scent of a seal. They can also break through the ice at thin areas. Sometimes they can sneak up on a sleeping seal. They have a very strong sense of smell, which they use to find prey out on the ice. Polar bears get most of their food when there is pack ice. They must eat and store fat before the ice is gone: they cannot catch seals in open water. After mating, females dig themselves into a den of snow on land for the rest of the winter. There, they have their cubs, usually twins. Bears usually eat fish, birds' eggs, seaweed, and dead whales, but they would rather have a meal of seal or walrus.\nThe Arctic fox often trails the bears onto the ice to eat their leftover food. The fox also eats rabbits, lemmings, and voles.\nThe lemmings and voles are the rats and mice of the Arctic. The lemmings have very short tails. They live underground in summer. Because the top soil freezes in the winter, they cannot burrow underground then, so they live under the snow during the colder months. They eat plants and roots. In a year with plenty of food, millions of lemmings will be roaming the tundra. The owls and foxes have more food than they can eat. They will have more young in years when there are many lemmings. However, the tundra does not have enough food for millions of lemmings. They rush across the tundra looking for food, and are eaten by predators or starve to death. Some try to swim across lakes or rivers and drown. The few that remain continue to have families.\nCaribou and their relative, the reindeer, also live in the Arctic. The caribou are now found mostly in North America, and they are larger than the reindeer. Large herds feed on the grass and lichens. When fall comes, they move south to winter feeding grounds. They dig through the snow with their sharp hoofs for food. Their hollow fur creates a cushion of air around them that helps them to stay warm. In the spring they return north to the summer pastures, where their calves are born. An hour or so after being born, the calves are able to follow the herd toward the Arctic Ocean. Most of the world's reindeer live in Europe and Asia. Some of these reindeer are not wild. They have been tamed by herdsmen who protect them from wolves and lead the migrations each spring and fall. Also, the musk ox, which looks like a shaggy buffalo, lives in the Arctic.\nIn summer, many birds visit the Arctic, and most of them are water birds, such as geese, ducks, swans, loons, and Arctic terns. Flying in for the summer, they raise their young and return south for the winter. The snowy owl and the ptarmigan stay all year. The color of the snowy owl matches the snow. The ptarmigan's summer plumage changes to white when it gets colder.\nThe smallest animals of the Arctic are the flies and the mosquitoes. Thick swarms bite both men and animals in the summer. The reindeer try to escape the mosquitoes by running to higher pastures, but the only real help comes with the snow and cold, when the swarms die off for another season.\nHuman life.\nOne of the surprises of the Arctic is that many people live there. Some people have lived there for thousands of years. Eskimo and Lapp people lived in the Arctic long before electric heaters, snow-mobiles, and modern houses.\nThe Lapps.\nIn an extremely northern part of Europe there is a place called Lapland. It is not a country, but parts of four countries. The people who lived there are called Lapps by outsiders. They call themselves \"Sami\". The Lapps of these four countries lived there long before the countries of Northway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia were created. There were several kinds of Lapp people. Some lived by the ocean and lived mostly on fish. Another group lived along the warmer rivers. These people did a little farming, hunting, and fishing to live.\nBut the best known of the Lapp people were the nomads who raised reindeer. The Lapps survived in their harsh homeland by domesticating the reindeer. The Lapps were able to get everything they needed from the deer. They ate mostly meat, milk, and cheese. Their clothes were made froom reindeer skins and wool. Their tents were also made from deer skins. They are known for the beautifully decorated woolen clothing they made.\nThe Lapps protected the herds, moving with them as they migrated from summer to winter pastures. They used trained reindeer to pull sleds carrying their supplies. During the winter, the herds moved south of the treeline. The Lapps would live nearby in homes made of logs or sod. The Lapps were very careful not to waste anything they got from the reindeer. Milk was taken from the reindeer to drink or make cheese. Meat was taken for food. The blood was frozen in chunks and used for soup and pancakes. Knives and belt buckles were carved from the bones and antlers. The sinews were used as sewing thread. Cleaned-out stomachs were used to carry milk or cheese. Every part of a dead reindeer was used.\nWinter clothing was made from layers of deer skin. The inside layer would be worn with the fur facing in toward the person's skin. The second layer was worn with the fur facing out. Boots were also made of fur, lined with grass that had been gathered during the short summer. Every evening the grass would be taken out and dried by the fire, so it would be ready to use again the next day. Thus, a Lapp could be warm and comfortable in even the coldest weather.\nToday only a few of the Lapp people still follow the herds. Those few use modern tools on their ancient migration. They use snowmobiles to herd the reindeer and rifles to kill the wolves that chase them. Even helicopters and radios are used to locate and move the reindeer. Most of the Lapp people now live on small farms in one of the four nations of Lapland. They raise crops and animals, including a few reindeer, to meet their needs. The sale of reindeer meat is an important source of income for the Lapp people.\nEskimos.\nEskimos are Arctic people, too. They sometimes ate raw meat. Eskimos were also nomads, but they did not have any animals except for dogs, which they used for pulling their sleds and helping them hunt. They were hunters and gatherers, and they lived off on whatever they found or killed. Like the Lapps, though, they were very careful to make good use of every part of the animals they killed. Eskimos lived in tents during the summer, and sod houses or igloos in the winter. The Eskimos made very clever things from the bones, antlers, and wood they had. They built different kinds of boats.\nEskimos did not have a government or laws, because they learned early in life to help each other in order to survive. Always sharing food, they usually moved around in small groups looking for food. Sometimes they'd get together in a large group when they hunted big animals such as whales. The men did the hunting and building the homes, and the women cooked, made the clothes, and took care of the children.\nThe Arctic today.\nThe Arctic region has many minerals that are important to people. Iron, lead, coal, copper, gold, and tin are all mined in different parts of this cold land. Large amounts of petroleum have been discovered in the Arctic in Russia, Alaska, and Canada. People live and work in the Arctic to remove these valuable minerals and sell them.\nThe oil in Alaska, for example, is very important to the United States. The main source is the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field on Alaska's north coast. It was discovered in 1968. Plans were quickly made to build a pipeline to bring the oil to an ice-free port so it could be shipped south. Oil companies spent billions of dollars to build the Trans-Alaska Pipeline in the mid-1970s. It had to be built above the ground in the northern section because of the permafrost. The warm oil in the pipes could have melted the permafrost and caused the ground to sink. That would have broken the pipes and caused an oil spill. The pipeline was completed in 1977. It brings oil to the seaport of Valdez on Alaska's south coast. From there the oil is taken by huge tankers to refineries along the west coast of the United States. If you live in western America, your family car may have Alaskan gasoline in its tank.\nRussia has more land in the Arctic than any other nation. The Russian Arctic in Asia and the area just south of it are called Siberia. It is such an empty, harsh place that it has been used as a penal colony for many years. The old Russian rulers and the modern communist Soviets would send criminals and people who disagreed to the government to live there. However, many people were also sent there to remove minerals, harvest trees from forests, and build cities.\nRussia has a huge port city right in Lapland, within the Arctic Circle. Murmansk is the largest city north of the Arctic Circle. The port is kept ice-free by the warm waters of the Gulf Stream coming up around Norway and Sweden from the South Atlantic. Huge icebreakers work to keep a path open so ships can reach the port. The port ships out fish, minerals, and lumber to Russia and the rest of the world.\nThe Arctic is also the shortest way (Great circle route) for airlines to fly between some cities on different continents. The flight from London to Tokyo, for example, is 1,400 miles shorter if flown across the top of the world instead of the old route south across Europe and Asia. The polar route from San Francisco to Norway is several hours shorter than the same flight going across the United States and the Pacific Ocean.\nThus, man is making use of the Arctic in various ways even though it is a hard place to live."}
{"id": "3639", "revid": "7868142", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3639", "title": "Sin", "text": "A sin is a bad act. Particularly, it is a bad act against another person(s), an animal, a spirit, or a god. \nIn Abrahamic religions, such as Christianity and Judaism, it is an act that goes against what God wants. It turns people away from God and true happiness. In Exodus chapter 20, Moses was given the Ten Commandments by God, explaining important sins like murder and idolatry. This is not believed by all people, and not all societies have the same idea of sin.\nThere is a difference between sins and prohibitions. For example, Muslims and Jews say that it is wrong to eat pork, and Hindus do not eat beef. That is for them, but for others it is not wrong to eat these things."}
{"id": "3640", "revid": "1072068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3640", "title": "Summer", "text": "Summer is one of the four seasons. It is the hottest season of the year. In some places, summer is the wettest season (with the most rain), and in other places, it is a dry season. Four seasons are found in areas which are not too hot or too cold. Summer happens to the north and south sides of the Earth at opposite times of the year. In the north part of the world, summer takes place between the months of June and September, and in the south part of the world, it takes place between December and March. This is because when the north part of the Earth points towards the Sun, the south part points away.\nMany people in rich countries travel in summer, to seaside resorts, beaches, camps or picnics. In some countries, they celebrate things in the summer as well as enjoying cool drinks. Other countries get snow in the summer just like winter.\nSummer is usually known as the hottest season."}
{"id": "3641", "revid": "921477", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3641", "title": "Month", "text": "A month is an amount of time used with calendars. It is about 1/12th of a year. It is a little longer than a natural synodic orbital period of the moon, ca. 29.5 days. Lunar calendars use the natural synodic month. For some purposes astronomers use the sidereal month of 27.3 days.\nOther calendars, called \"solar calendars\", ignore the moon, and depend entirely on the Sun \u2014 for example, the Gregorian calendar of 365 or 366 days (12 months) used in much of the world today."}
{"id": "3658", "revid": "1025654", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3658", "title": "Alberta", "text": "Alberta is a province in western Canada. It is bounded by the provinces of British Columbia on the west, Saskatchewan on the east, the US state of Montana on the south and the Northwest Territories to the North. \nAlberta is the fourth largest Canadian province with an area of . Alberta has around 4,067,175 living there, making it the fourth most populous province in Canada. \nThe capital of Alberta is Edmonton lying near the middle of Alberta. The city of Calgary, Alberta\u2019s other major centre is located about 300 kilometres to the south of Edmonton. \nHistory.\nCanada became a country in 1867. It was much smaller than it is now, and did not include the parts of the country to the west. From 1670 to 1870, parts of Alberta were included in \"Rupert's Land,\" land owned by the Hudson\u2019s Bay Company in support of it\u2019s trading monopoly over a vast area of Canada and parts of the United States. Northern part of Alberta was part of the what was then called \"Northwestern Territories.\" \nAlberta was made a province of Canada in 1905, at the same time as Saskatchewan. \nThe Aboriginal peoples of Canada are referred to as First Nations or by the Name of their Nation. Mixed (European/Aboriginal) People are called Metis. \nWeather.\nAlberta is very cold in the winter and has a lot of snow during the very cold season. There is a dry part of Alberta in the south.\nWork in Alberta.\nAlberta has a huge amount of oil (in the Athabasca Oil Sands) and natural gas. \nThere are also a lot of farms in Alberta. Farmers grow several different types of crops Farmers mainly grow wheat. There are also a lot of cows on Alberta farms, and Alberta beef is exported.\nThere is diesel fuel in Alberta."}
{"id": "3659", "revid": "152", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3659", "title": "Electronics", "text": "Electronics is the study of electricity (the flow of electrons) and how to use that to build things like computers. It uses circuits that are made with parts called components and connecting wires to do useful things. The science behind Electronics comes from the study of physics and gets applied in real-life ways through the field of electrical engineering.\nMany people can name several simple electronic components, such as transistors, fuses, circuit breakers, batteries, motors, transformers, LEDs and bulbs, but as the number of components starts to increase, it often helps to think in terms of smaller systems or blocks, which can be connected together to do something useful. \nOne way of looking at an electronic system is to separate it into three parts:\nA television set, for example, has as its input a broadcast signal received from an antenna, or for cable television, a cable.\nSignal processing circuits inside the television set use the brightness, colour, and sound information contained in the received signal to control the television set's output devices. The display output device may be a cathode ray tube (CRT) or a plasma or liquid crystal display screen. The audio output device might be a magnetically driven audio speaker. The display output devices convert the signal processing circuits' brightness and colour information into the visible image displayed on a screen. The audio output device converts the processed sound information into sounds that can be heard by listeners.\nAnalysis of a circuit/network involves knowing the input and the signal processing circuit, and finding out the output. Knowing the input and output and finding out or designing the signal processing part is called \"synthesis\".\nHistory.\nPeople started experimenting with electricity as early as 600 B.C.E, when Thales of Miletus discovered rubbing fur on amber would cause them to attract each other.\nStarting in the 1900s, devices used glass or metal vacuum tubes to control the flow of electricity. With these components a low power voltage can be used to change another. This revolutionized radio, and allowed other inventions.\nIn the 1960s and early 1970s transistors and semiconductor began replacing vacuum tubes. Transistors can be made much smaller than vacuum tubes and they can work using less energy.\nAt about the same time, integrated circuits (circuits that are integrated inside other circuits) became commonly used. Integrated circuits made it possible to reduce the number of parts needed to make electronic products and made the products much cheaper in general.\nAnalog circuits.\nAnalog circuits are used for signals that have a range of amplitudes. In general, analog circuits measure or control the amplitude of signals. In the early days of electronics, all electronic devices used analog circuits. The frequency of the analog circuit is often measured or controlled in analog signal processing. Even though more digital circuits are made, analog circuits will always be necessary, since the world and its people work in analog ways.\nPulse circuits.\nPulse circuits are used for signals that require rapid pulses of energy. For example, radar works by using pulse circuits to create and send high powered bursts of radio energy from radar transmitters. Radar antennas are used to send (\"transmit\") the high powered bursts in the direction the antenna is pointed.\nThe radar transmitter's pulses or bursts of radio energy hit and bounce back (they are \"reflected\") from hard and metallic objects. Hard objects are things like buildings, hills, and mountains. Big things made of metal include aircraft, bridges, or even objects in space, like satellites. The reflected radar energy is detected by radar pulse receivers which use both pulse and digital circuits together. The pulse and digital circuits in radar pulse receivers are used to show the location and distance of objects which have reflected the radar transmitter's high powered pulses.\nBy controlling how often the rapid pulses of radar energy are sent out by a radar transmitter (called the transmitter's \"pulse timing\"), and how long it takes for the reflected pulse energy to come back to the radar receiver, one can tell not only where objects are, but also how far away they are. Digital circuits in a radar receiver calculate the distance to an object by knowing the time interval between energy pulses. The radar receiver's digital circuits count how long it takes between pulses for an object's reflected energy to be detected by the radar receiver. Since radar pulses are sent and received at approximately the speed of light, the distance to an object can easily be calculated. This is done in digital circuits by multiplying the speed of light by the time it takes to receive the radar energy reflected back from an object.\nThe time between pulses (often called \"pulse rate time\", or PRT) sets the limit on how far away an object can be detected. That distance is called the \"range\" of a radar transmitter and receiver. Radar transmitters and receivers use long PRT's to find the distance to objects that are far away. Long PRT's makes it possible to accurately determine the distance to the moon, for example. Fast PRT's are used to detect objects that are much closer, like ships at sea, high flying aircraft, or to determine the speed of fast moving automobiles on highways.\nDigital circuits.\nDigital circuits are used for signals that only turn on and off instead of often working at levels somewhere between on and off. Active components in digital circuits typically have one signal level when turned on, and another signal level when turned off. In general, in digital circuits a component is only switched on and off.\nComputers and electronic clocks are examples of electronic devices that are made up of mostly digital circuits.\nBasic blocks:\nComplex devices:"}
{"id": "3660", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3660", "title": "Scalar", "text": "Scalars are simple numbers. They are used for measuring things. Many things can be measured, and the measure can be explained by only giving the number.\nSuppose we are measuring a rod. We could give the measured length as 2 metres or 3 cm\u2014depending on the length of the rod under observation. Here, only the figure 2 or 3 along with the unit of measure is enough to transmit information about the rod.\nOther examples of scalars are: \nIn other words, mass is measured by scalars, just like distances are measured by scalars.\nIn mathematics, scalars are distinguished from more complex mathematical objects such as vectors and matrices in that they consist of only one number. A scalar formula_1 can also be multiplied to a vector formula_2 or a matrix formula_3, resulting in the vector formula_4 and the matrix formula_5, respectively. For vectors, scalar multiplication produces a new vector of different length in the same or opposite direction of the original vector."}
{"id": "3661", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3661", "title": "Photon", "text": "Photons (from Greek \u03c6\u03c9\u03c2, meaning \"light\"), in many atomic models in physics, are particles which transmit light. In other words, light is carried over space by photons. Photon is an elementary particle that is its own antiparticle. In quantum mechanics each photon has a characteristic quantum of energy that depends on frequency: A photon associated with light at a higher frequency will have more energy (and be associated with light at a shorter wavelength).\nPhotons have a rest mass of 0 (zero). However, Einstein's theory of relativity says that they do have a certain amount of momentum. Before the photon got its name, Einstein revived the proposal that light is separate pieces of energy (particles). These particles came to be known as photons. \nA photon is usually given the symbol \u03b3 (gamma), \nProperties.\nPhotons are fundamental particles. Although they can be created and destroyed, their lifetime is infinite.\nIn a vacuum, all photons move at the speed of light, c, which is equal to 299,792,458 meters (approximately 300,000 kilometers) per second.\nA photon has a given frequency, which determines its color. Radio technology makes great use of frequency. Beyond the visible range, frequency is less discussed, for example it is little used in distinguishing between X-Ray photons and infrared. Frequency is equivalent to the quantum energy of the photon, as related by the Planck constant equation,\nwhere formula_2 is the photon's energy, formula_3 is the Plank constant, and formula_4 is the frequency of the light associated with the photon. This frequency, formula_4, is typically measured in cycles per second, or equivalently, in Hz. The quantum energy of different photons is often used in cameras, and other machines that use visible and higher than visible radiation. This because these photons are energetic enough to ionize atoms. \nAnother property of a photon is its wavelength. The frequency formula_4, wavelength , and speed of light formula_7 are related by the equation,\nwhere formula_9 (lambda) is the wavelength, or length of the wave (typically measured in meters.)\nAnother important property of a photon is its polarity. If you saw a giant photon coming straight at you, it could appear as a swath whipping vertically, horizontally, or somewhere in between. Polarized sunglasses stop photons swinging up and down from passing. This is how they reduce glare as light bouncing off of surfaces tend to fly that way. Liquid crystal displays also use polarity to control which light passes through. Some animals can see light polarization. \nFinally, a photon has a property called spin. Spin is related to light's circular polarization.\nPhoton interactions with matter.\nLight is often created or absorbed when an electron gains or loses energy. This energy can be in the form of heat, kinetic energy, or other form. For example, an incandescent light bulb uses heat. The increase of energy can push an electron up one level in a shell called a \"valence\". This makes it unstable, and like everything, it wants to be in the lowest energy state. (If being in the lowest energy state is confusing, pick up a pencil and drop it. Once on the ground, the pencil will be in a lower energy state). When the electron drops back down to a lower energy state, it needs to release the energy that hit it, and it must obey the conservation of energy (energy can neither be created nor destroyed). Electrons release this energy as photons, and at higher intensities, this photon can be seen as visible light.\nPhotons and the electromagnetic force.\nIn particle physics, photons are responsible for electromagnetic force. Electromagnetism is an idea that combines electricity with magnetism. One common way that we experience electromagnetism in our daily lives is light, which is caused by electromagnetism. Electromagnetism is also responsible for charge, which is the reason that you can not push your hand through a table. Since photons are the force-carrying particle of electromagnetism, they are also gauge bosons. Some matter\u2013called dark matter\u2013is not believed to be affected by electromagnetism. This would mean that dark matter does not have a charge, and does not give off light."}
{"id": "3662", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3662", "title": "Vector", "text": "A vector is a mathematical object that has a size, called the \"magnitude\", and a direction. It is often represented by boldface letters (such as formula_1, formula_2, formula_3), or as a line segment from one point to another (as in formula_4).\nFor example, a vector would be used to show the distance and direction something moved in. When asking for directions, if one says \"Walk one kilometer towards the North\", that would be a vector, but if they say \"Walk one kilometer\", without showing a direction, then that would be a scalar.\nWe usually draw vectors as arrows. The length of the arrow is proportional to the vector's magnitude. The direction in which the arrow points to is the vector's direction.\nHow to add vectors.\nAdding vectors on paper using the head to tail method.\nThe Head to Tail method of adding vectors is useful for doing an estimate on paper of the result of adding two vectors. To do it:\nIt's called the \"Head to Tail\" method, because each head from the previous vector leads in to the tail of the next one.\nUsing component form.\nUsing the component form to add two vectors literally means adding the components of the vectors to create a new vector. For example, let a and b be two two-dimensional vectors. These vectors can be written in terms of their components.\nformula_5\nformula_6\nSuppose c is the sum of these two vectors, so that c = a + b. This means that formula_7.\nHere is an example of addition of two vectors, using their component forms:\nformula_8\nformula_9\nformula_10\nThis method works for all vectors, not just two dimensional ones.\nHow to multiply vectors.\nUsing the dot product.\nThe dot product is one method to multiply vectors. It produces a scalar. It uses component form:\nformula_11\nUsing the cross product.\nThe cross product is another method to multiply vectors. Unlike dot product, it produces a vector. Using component form:\nformula_12\nHere, formula_13 means the length of formula_14, and formula_15 is the unit vector at right angles to both formula_14 and formula_17.\nMultiplying by a scalar.\nTo multiply a vector by a scalar (a normal number), you multiply the number by each component of the vector:\nformula_18\nAn example of this is\nformula_19"}
{"id": "3665", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3665", "title": "Soap bubble", "text": "A soap bubble is a very thin film of soap water. Their shape is a hollow, round ball, or sphere. They have a colorful surface. Soap bubbles do not last very long. Sometimes they break in the air. When they touch something else, they usually break. When people talk about soap bubbles they think about them being pretty but short-lived. So, they are a symbol for other things that are pretty but short-lived or unimportant. Children enjoy playing with bubbles. Sometimes, adults enjoy seeing art done with soap bubbles.\nThey get their colors from iridescence."}
{"id": "3666", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3666", "title": "Mathematical", "text": ""}
{"id": "3667", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3667", "title": "Fire Brigades Union", "text": "The Fire Brigades Union (FBU) is the main union for firefighters in the United Kingdom. A union is a group of workers. They make the group to improve pay and working conditions. It was founded in 1918 in the London area as the \"Firemans Trade Union\". It soon grew to cover the entire country. Today, it has around 50,000 members."}
{"id": "3672", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3672", "title": "Accelerate", "text": ""}
{"id": "3674", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3674", "title": "Bicycle", "text": "A bicycle (or bike) is a small, human powered land vehicle with a seat, two wheels, two pedals, and a metal chain connected to cogs on the pedals and rear wheel. A frame gives the bike strength, and the other parts are attached to the frame. The name comes from these two words - the prefix \"bi-\" meaning two, and the suffix \"-cycle\" meaning wheel. It is powered by a person riding on top, who pushes the pedals around with his or her feet.\nRiding bicycles, which is also called cycling, is an important way to travel in several parts of the world. The most popular type of cycling is Utility cycling. It is also a common recreation, a good form of low-impact exercise, and a popular sport. Road bicycle racing is the second most popular spectator sport in the world.\nBicycling uses less energy per mile than any other human transport.\nInvention.\nIn 1817 a German professor, Baron Karl von Drais, created the first two-wheeled bicycle. It was made of wood and had two wheels. The front wheel could be turned using the handlebars in order to steer the bike. However, it did not have pedals, so the rider would have to push their feet on the ground to make it move.\nIn the 1860s, French inventors added pedals to the front wheel. However, it took a lot of effort to turn the pedals. Later inventors made bikes out of metal only, and made the front wheel very big, giving higher speed. This design was called the penny-farthing bicycle. However, it was difficult to ride, since it could fall easily and the rider would fall far.\nSeveral improvements were made in the 1880s and '90s. In 1885, the safety bicycle was invented. This had two wheels the same size so that the rider could sit at a lower height. It was called the safety bicycle because it much easier to ride than the penny-farthing. When stopping, the rider can simply put down a foot instead of completely dismounting. Instead of pedaling and steering with the front wheel, the safety bicycle steers with the front wheel while the pedals turn the back wheel using a chain. Brakes operated by hand levers on some bikes also increased safety.\nIn 1888, Scottish inventor John Boyd Dunlop re-invented a type of tire which was filled with air. This made safety bicycles more comfortable. Soon, the freewheel was invented. This was a device inside the hub of the back wheel that allowed the wheel to spin even if the rider wasn't pedaling. However, this meant the rider could no longer stop the bike by backpedaling. As a result, better hand brakes were invented, and a different type of brake which could stop the bike if the pedals were turned backwards. Later inventions included better brakes, and gears which made cycling over hills much easier. During this time the bicycle became very popular. \nBasic Design.\nBasic components common to most bikes include a seat, pedals, gearing, handlebar, wheels, and brakes, all mounted on a frame. The majority also have a gear shifter. The cyclist's feet push the pedals to make them go around in circles, which moves the chain, which turns the back wheel of the bike to make the bike move forwards. The front wheel is connected to the handlebar, so turning the handlebar from side to side swivels the front wheel which steers the bike.\nSafety.\nMany thousands of people are hurt every year in bicycle accidents, and hundreds die. Careful riding helps prevent accidents. When riding on streets, it is safest to ride on the same side of the street that cars drive (which would mean riding on the right side of the road in countries where people drive on the right side of the road, and riding on the left in countries where people drive on the left). To avoid hitting people, riders must obey signs that say \"no bicycling\", even if it does not seem to make sense at the time. Low light makes bicycle lighting important. It may not be safe to ride when it is dark. Riders wear reflective clothing to be safer in low light. Wearing a helmet makes bicycle riding safer. Wearing a helmet does not mean that somebody cannot be hurt if they crash their bicycle, but it makes being hurt less likely. Some bicycles have bells or horns that the rider can use to warn other people that they are riding by them.\nMany places have a bicycle path linking houses with shops, schools and stations. These make bicycling safer, letting cyclists stay away from busy motor traffic on dangerous roads."}
{"id": "3675", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3675", "title": "Wheel", "text": "A wheel is a disc or circle-shaped mechanical device. Its main purpose is to allow things to \"roll\"; in other words, the wheel spins, and object on the wheels moves more easily along the ground. It is a simple machine. \nMost land vehicles roll on wheels. Wheels are often used in pairs, connected by a rod of wood or metal known as an axle. Many machines have wheels with teeth, known as gears. The principle behind the wheel is that of mechanical advantage.\nWheel and axle.\nThis is a machine in which the wheel and axle turn together. It is the basis of many machines, not just vehicles. The potter's wheel, the lathe and the windlass are examples.\nHistory.\nMost experts believe that the ancient Mesopotamians invented the wheel about 4000 BC.\nPeople in Asia also discovered it on their own around 3500 BC. The Inca and Maya had wheels on children's toys around 1500 BC, but they did not use wheels for work. Africa south of the Sahara desert, Europe, and Australia did not have the wheel until people there met people from Europe. Early wheels were solid disks; the spoked wheel was invented around 2000 BC. The earliest documentation of a vehicle with wheels is a painting dated between 33503500 BC."}
{"id": "3679", "revid": "1084568", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3679", "title": "Physical exercise", "text": "The word exercise means:\nBasic modes of physical exercises.\nPeople do physical exercises as a part of their healthy lifestyle to get stronger and healthier or stay strong and healthy or to improve their body image. There are three basic modes of physical exercises:\nExercises can be an important part of physical therapy, weight loss, or sports performance.\nExercise can be fun, but it is important for the exerciser to do what he likes and eat enough calories , so when he exercises he is building up muscles, not just breaking them down for fuel. Carbohydrates are muscle-sparing; and if one does not get enough calories overall, there is the risk of burning muscles up with the fat to make up the deficit.\nExercise benefits.\nBenefits of exercise for all ages have been known since antiquity. Marcus Cicero, around 65 BC, stated: \u201cIt is exercise alone that supports the spirits, and keeps the mind in vigor.\u201d\nThe CDC recommends that adults should get 150 minutes of physical activity weekly. Regular exercise has been shown to help high blood pressure, obesity, heart disease, diabetes, and depression, among others. Exercise also helps people feel less tired.\nRegular exercise can have a profoundly positive impact on depression, anxiety, and ADHD. It also relieves stress, improves memory, helps sleep better, and boosts overall mood. Studies show that exercise can treat mild to moderate depression as effectively as antidepressant medication but without the side-effects, of course."}
{"id": "3680", "revid": "917214", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3680", "title": "Percentage", "text": "Percent means \"out of one hundred\". It is often shown with the symbol \"%\". It is used even if there are not a hundred items. The number is then scaled so it can be compared to one hundred. Percent is also used to indicate changes in numerical quantities. \nFor example, we have a bowl of fruit with three apples and one orange. The percentage of apples is 3 out of 4, or 3/4 = 75/100 = 75%. \nA percentage is only one way of writing a ratio; one can also write it as a fraction or decimal. There are ways to convert fractions to percentages or decimals to percentages.\nUses.\nPercentages are useful in practice, because it allows one to compare things that are not out of the same number. For example, exam marks are often percentages, which can compare them even if there are more questions on one exam paper than the other."}
{"id": "3681", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3681", "title": "Writing", "text": "Writing is the act of recording language on a visual medium using a set of symbols. The symbols must be known to others, so that the text may be read.\nA text may also use other visual systems, such as illustrations and decorations. These are not called writing, but may help the message work. Usually, all educated people in a country use the same writing system to record the same language. To be able to read and write is to be literate.\nWriting differs from speech because \"the readers need not be present at the time\". We can read writing from long ago, and from different parts of the world. Text stores and communicates knowledge. Writing is one of the greatest inventions of the human species. It was invented after people settled in towns, and after agriculture started. Writing dates from about 3,300, which is over 5000 years ago, in the Middle East.\nWriting today is usually on paper, though there are ways to print on almost any surface. Television and movie screens can also display writing, and so can computer screens. Many writing materials were invented, long before paper. Clay, papyrus, wood, slate and parchment (prepared animal skins) have all been used. The Romans wrote on waxed tablets with a pointed stylus; this was popular for temporary notes and messages. The later invention of paper by the Chinese was a big step forward.\nWriting is traditionally done using a hand tool such as a pencil, a pen, or a brush. More and more, however, text is created by input on a computer keyboard.\nDefinition of writing.\nThere are two schools of thought:\nTherefore, depending on an author's definition of writing, the term may be used in different ways. With many early systems we do not know what they do convey. The central idea is that \"a full writing system must be able to represent anything that might be said in spoken language\".p7, 217 From this point of view the invention of the rebus is an essential step.\nWe can only be sure a sign system is full writing if we can translate the symbols into a modern language. In the case of some ancient scripts we cannot do this.\nHistory of writing.\nWriting was invented independently a number of times. The Sumerian, the ancient Egyptian, the Chinese and the Mayan writings are separate in their invention.p85 All these writing systems started with \"pictographs\", symbols that stood for things. Then they developed a mixture of methods. Our own alphabetic system is different. It is based on the sounds of spoken language. All alphabets are modified versions of the first one, which originated with the Phoenicians and the Ancient Greeks.\nSumer.\nThe Sumerians lived in Mesopotamia, between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. 5000 years ago this was a fertile region and is now mostly in Iraq. The Sumerians developed a form of writing called cuneiform. Triangular marks were pressed into soft clay tablets. After the clay had dried in the sun the tablets were baked. Then they were carried somewhere else for others to read. We know that its first uses were for trade, accounting and administration.\nThe earliest signs were mostly pictorial, but soon they stood as symbols for objects, ideas and sounds. This writing system was extremely successful, and outlasted the Sumerian empire. It was then used by other civilisations in the Middle East, such as the Old \nAkkadian, Babylonian, Assyrian, Elamite, Hittite, Old Persian and Ugaritic empires. The last cuneiform inscription was dated as 75. Thus the system had lasted for more than 3000 years.p71 Each version of cuneiform had to be deciphered separately, because all the languages were different. Documents (including stone objects) written in more than one language provided the clues.\nAncient Egypt.\nThis is the most famous of the old forms of writing, or \"scripts\". It was invented at roughly the same time as cuneiform, yet was quite different in style, and used different materials. Egyptians ended up with three writing systems for the same language. They were:\nThe writing tools used varied according to the material which was written on. The two cursive scripts were written with reed pens and carbon inks onto papyrus. If the material was cloth, then the writing was done by a brush. Many examples survive. The hieroglyphs were inscribed (carved) into stone (hammer &amp; chisel) or painted onto stone surfaces. Many survive, some with the original colours intact. The key event in the decipherment of hieroglyphic writing was the discovery of the Rosetta Stone. This is a granite slab with the same message written in hieroglyphic, demotic and in Greek. Ancient Greek is well understood, and made possible the interpretation of the other two scripts.\nChinese.\nChinese is the language with the largest number of native speakers. Its history dates back to about 1400.p183 The Chinese writing system is idio-syllabic, a mixed method using characters which may have one or more of these elements:\nChinese has a huge number of characters: in the region of 50,000.p186 Because of this, printing methods were never really successful in China, despite their early invention. In the 14th century Wang Tzhen had sixty thousand wood block characters cut, a huge investment in time and money. He printed 100 copies of a local gazette, and was author of a treatise on agriculture and other technical works. Even with printing machines from Europe in the 19th century, the process was hampered by the huge number of characters, which slowed the \"composition\" to a snail's pace.\nChina has eight regional languages that are mutually unintelligible, and many true dialects. The system appears to work mainly because as many as 70% speak Mandarin. Fluency in Chinese reading and writing is undoubtedly difficult to achieve, and this must act as a brake on the drive for literacy. There have been a number of attempts to reform or simplify the system. The most radical in Pinyin, which is a program to replace Chinese characters with an alphabetic system. This was supported by Mao, but faltered after his death.\nAlphabets.\nIt seems that the idea of an alphabet\u2013a script based entirely upon sound\u2013arose only once, and has been copied and adapted to suit many different languages. Although no alphabet fits its language perfectly, it is flexible enough to fit any language approximately. It was a unique invention.p12\nOur alphabet is called the Roman alphabet, as compared with the Cyrillic and other alphabets. All of these come from the ancient Greek alphabet, which dates back to about 1100 to 800.p167 The Greek alphabet was probably developed from the Phoenician script, which appeared somewhat earlier, and had some similar letter-shapes.\nThe Phoenician language was a Semitic language, often called Canaanite. The Semitic group of languages includes Arabic, Maltese, Hebrew and also Aramaic, the language spoken by Jesus. We do not know much about how the alphabetic idea arose, but the Phoenicians, a trading people, came up with letters which were adapted by the early Greeks to produce their alphabet. The one big difference is that the Phoenician script had no pure vowels. Arabic script has vowels which may be shown by diacritics (small marks above or below the line). The oldest Qu'ran manuscripts had no diacritics. Israeli children today use texts with vowel 'dots' added, to about the third grade.p89\nNo ancient script, alphabetic or not, had pure vowels before the Greeks. The Greek alphabet even has two vowels for 'e' and two for 'o', to distinguish between the long and short sounds. It is fairly clear from this that careful thought went into both the Phoenician invention and the Greek adaptation. However, no details survive of either process.\nSemitic scripts apparently derive from \"Proto-Sinaitic\", a script of which only 31 inscriptions (plus 17 doubtful) are known. It is thought by some researchers that the original source of this script was the Egyptian hieratic script. By the late Middle Kingdom (about 1900) hieratic had added some alphabetic signs for representing the consonants of foreign names. Egyptian activity in Sinai was at its height at that time. A similar idea had been suggested many years before.\nUndeciphered scripts.\nThere are a number of scripts which have never been deciphered, despite much effort.p145 Perhaps the most famous are the script of the Indus Valley civilization, and Etruscan. The Indus River civilisation predates other literate civilisations on the Indian subcontinent, going back to about 2500. Their cities of Mohenjo-Daru and Harappa were well-planned, with good drainage. The script is found on seal stones, terracotta, bronze, bone and ivory. All are brief, and the language is unknown.\nThe Etruscan language used Greek letter-forms, and is found mainly on Etruscan tombs, from Tuscany through to Venice. They were an empire before the Romans, who defeated them, and absorbed their ideas. All knowledge of their language was lost, except that some of the names on tomb memorials can be read from the Greek letters.\nVin\u010da symbols.\nThe T\u0103rt\u0103ria tablets are three tablets discovered in 1961 in the village of T\u0103rt\u0103ria (Hungarian: Als\u00f3tat\u00e1rlaka). This is about from Alba Iulia in Romania. The tablets, dated to around 5300 BC, have symbols in clay: the \"Vin\u010da symbols\". Some claim they are a yet undeciphered language. If this is so, they would be the earliest known form of writing. In 1908 similar symbols were found during excavations, by Miloje Vasi\u0107 (1869\u20131956) in Vin\u010da. This is a suburb of Belgrade (Serbia), some 300\u00a0km from Turda\u0219. Later, more were found in another part of Belgrade. Since 1875 over one hundred and fifty Vin\u010da sites have been found in Serbia alone. Many, including Vin\u010da itself, have not been fully excavated. The culture of the whole area is called the Vin\u010da culture. Although some of these symbols look exactly the same as some letters in Etruscan, Greek, and Aramaic, they are generally regarded as an original, independent development.\nLiteracy.\nIt is only in the last 150 years that most people have been able to read and write in Europe and North America. In many other parts of the world this did not happen until the 20th century. Until then, literacy was mainly for clerics, that is, people who had training as priests. Even wealthy people were often illiterate, and used scribes to write for them. The invention of printing came before mass literacy. Before 1500, each book had to be created by hand, so there were few books available compared to the billions in the world today. Mass literacy needed cheap books.\nEven now, there is still widespread illiteracy.\nHandwriting.\nThe ordinary use of writing by means of a pen and paper. Can refer to writing for oneself, as in a diary, but mostly it refers to sending letters. Once it was almost the only means of communication between people who were separated. Now, the telephone and e-mail are the most common means of distance communication."}
{"id": "3683", "revid": "731605", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3683", "title": "Rock", "text": "Rock has several meanings: "}
{"id": "3684", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3684", "title": "Plato", "text": "Plato was one of the most important classical Greek philosophers. He lived from 427 BC to 348 BC. A wealthy man, he owned at least 50 slaves and created the first university school, called \"The Academy\". Plato was a student of Socrates (who did not write) and the teacher of Aristotle, who founded another university, known as the Lyceum. Plato wrote about many ideas in philosophy that are still talked about today. He wrote about ideas of deductive reasoning. One modern philosopher, Alfred North Whitehead, said that all philosophy since Plato has just been comments on his works.\nPlato wrote his books in the form of dialogues with two people or more talking about ideas, and sometimes disagreeing about them. The \"Laws\" is Plato's longest dialogue and probably his last.\nSocrates is usually the main person in Plato's dialogues. Usually, Socrates talks with people about their ideas, and tries to see if they believe anything that is illogical. Other people in the stories often become angry with Socrates because of this. People who study Plato argue about whether Socrates really said the same things that Plato makes him say, or whether Plato just used Socrates as a character, to make the ideas he was talking about seem more important.\nPlato opposed the rhetorics of sophism and insisted on true justice and equality in his work \"Gorgias\", and on immortality of soul in \"Phaedo\".\nOne of Plato's most famous works is \"The Republic\" (in Greek, \"Politeia,\" or 'city'). In that work, he describes Socrates's vision of an \"ideal\" state. The method of questioning in this dialogue, called the Socratic method, is as important as the content. \"The Republic\" contains ideas of Socrates: \"Socrates said it, Plato wrote it.\"\nWorks by Plato.\nThere are many dialogues that were supposed to be written by Plato. This list includes those he probably did write.\nReferences.\nSources:"}
{"id": "3686", "revid": "212856", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3686", "title": "Book", "text": "A book is a set of printed sheets of paper held together between two covers. The sheets of paper are usually covered with a text, language and illustrations. The book is a more flexible format than the earlier idea of the scroll. The change from scrolls to books began in the Roman Empire, and took many centuries to become complete.\nA writer of a book is called an author. Someone who draws pictures in a book is called an illustrator. Books can have more than one author or illustrator.\nA book can also be a text in a larger collection of texts. That way a \"book\" is perhaps written by one author, or it only treats one subject area. Books in this sense can often be understood without knowing the whole collection. Examples are the Iliad, Odyssey, Bible and Torah. All of them consist of a number of \u201cbooks\u201d in this sense of the word. Encyclopedias often have separate articles written by different people, and published as separate volumes. Each volume is a book.\n\"Hardcover\" books have hard covers made of cardboard covered in cloth or leather and are usually sewn together. \"Paperback\" books have covers of stiff paper and are usually glued together. The words in books can be read aloud and recorded on tapes or compact discs. These are called \"audiobooks\".\nBooks can be borrowed from a library or bought from a bookstore. People can make their own books and fill them with family photos, drawings, or their own writing. Some books are empty inside, like a diary, address book, or photo album. Most of the time, the word \"book\" means that the pages inside have words printed or written on them.\nSome books are written just for children, or for entertainment, while other books are for studying something in school such as math or history. Many books have photographs or drawings.\nContent of books.\nThere are two main kinds of book text: fiction and non-fiction.\nFiction.\nThese books are novels, about stories that did not happen, and have been imagined by the author. Some books are based on real events from history, but the author has created imaginary characters or dialogue for the events.\nNon-fiction.\nBooks of non-fiction are about true facts or things that have really happened. Some examples are dictionaries, cookbooks, textbooks for learning in school, or a biography (someone's life story).\nHistorical.\nBetween the written manuscript and the book lie several inventions. Manuscripts are hand-made, but books are now industrial products.\nManuscripts.\nA common type of manuscript was the scroll, which was a long sheet rolled up. The sheet could have been made of papyrus (made by the Egyptians, by weaving the inner stems of the papyrus plant and then hammering them together), or parchment or vellum (very thin animal skin, first used by the ancient Greeks), or paper (made from plant fibers, invented by the Chinese). Manuscripts of this kind lasted to the 16th century and beyond. Turning the manuscript into a book required several developments.\nThe codex.\nThe Romans were the first people to put separate pieces of manuscript between covers, to form a \"codex\". This was more convenient to handle and store than scrolls, but was not yet a book as we understand it.\nPrinting.\nScrolls and codices were written and copied by hand. The Chinese invented \"woodblock printing\", where shapes are carved out of a block of wood, then ink is applied to the carved side, and the block is pressed onto paper. This woodcut method was slow because the symbols and pictures were made by cutting away the surrounding wood.\nJohannes Gutenberg was the first to invent a machine for printing, the printing press, in the 15th century. This involved more than just a press, it involved the production of movable metal type suitable for the machine process.\nInitially, the machines were slow, and needed a printer's muscle to make them work. The Industrial Revolution brought steam power and later electrification.\nPaper and ink.\nPaper had been invented in China in the 8th century, but it was kept secret for a long time. In Europe hand-made paper was available from about 1450. It was cheaper than parchment but still expensive, and the early printing was a slow process. Therefore, books remained rare. In 1800 the first machines for making paper from wood pulp were invented. New kinds of inks were also invented for various purposes, and machines were driven by steam engines and later by electricity.\nThe common cheap supply of paper fed the faster printing machines, and books became cheaper. At the same time, in America, Britain and continental Europe, more people learnt to read. So, in the 19th century, many ordinary people could afford to buy books and could actually read them. Also in the 19th century came public libraries, so poorer people could get access to the best books.\nBinding.\nPrinting was done on large sheets of paper, which were then folded, guillotined (cut) and sewn into the covers. Bookbinding and all the other processes have been done by machines since the 19th century.\nNow.\nToday some of the technologies have been changed, especially those involving illustration and typography. However, books look much the same as they did, with more illustration in color, but basically the same. That is because experience has shown that readers need certain things for pleasurable reading. Graphic design and typography are the practical arts used to make books attractive and useful to readers."}
{"id": "3687", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3687", "title": "Sundial", "text": "A sundial shows the current solar time during the day. It does this because the sun appears to move through the sky. At different times in the day when the sun is shining, a shadow is cast in different places on the dial. A person marks the dial with the time at a certain shadow. This lets users easily see the time. There are a few commonly seen designs, such as the 'ordinary' or standard horizontal garden sundial. However, sundials can be designed for any surface where a fixed object casts a predictable shadow. They may be horizontal or vertical or tilted. \nAncient Egypt had sundials. Other cultures developed them further, including the Greeks and Romans."}
{"id": "3689", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3689", "title": "Penninsula", "text": ""}
{"id": "3690", "revid": "1143240", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3690", "title": "Peninsula", "text": "A peninsula is a region of land that sticks out in a body of water. It is also defined as a piece of land with water on three sides.\nMany countries are on peninsulas, and may either take up part of a peninsula (such as Portugal) or all of it (such as India). Parts of a country may also be on a peninsula. For example, Jutland is a peninsula, as is Baja California in Mexico.\nIf Eurasia is considered a continent then the continent of Europe is technically a peninsula. In this case, the great peninsulas of Europe, the Iberian, Italian, and Balkan peninsulas would technically be peninsulas within peninsulas. The area of the European Peninsula, comprised of Europe minus Russia, Fennoscandia, and any islands, is roughly 4.4 million square kilometers.\nThe Arabian Peninsula is usually cited as the largest peninsula in the world with an area of 3,237,500 square kilometers."}
{"id": "3691", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3691", "title": "Derivative", "text": "A derivative is something created from a Primary source, and can mean different things."}
{"id": "3692", "revid": "608598", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3692", "title": "Combinatorial game theory", "text": "Combinatorial game theory, also known as CGT is a branch of applied mathematics and theoretical computer science that studies combinatorial games, and is distinct from \"traditional\" or \"economic\" game theory. CGT arose in relation to the theory of impartial games, the two-player game of Nim in particular, with an emphasis on \"solving\" certain types of combinatorial games.\nA game must meet several conditions to be a combinatorial game. These are:\nCombinatorial Game Theory is largely confined to the study of a subset of combinatorial games which are two player, finite, and have a winner and loser (i.e. do not end in draws.)\nThese combinatorial games can be represented by trees, each vertex of which is the game resulting from a particular move from the game directly below it on the tree. These games can be assigned game values. Finding these game values is of great interests to CG theorists, as is the theoretical concept of game addition. The sum of two games is the game in which each player on her/his turn must move in only one of the two games, leaving the other as it was. \nElwyn Berlekamp, John Conway and Richard Guy are the founders of the theory. They worked together in the 1960s. Their published work was called \"Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays\".\nDefinitions.\nIn the theory, there are two players called \"left\" and \"right\". A game is something that allows left and right to make moves to \"other games\". For example, in the game of chess, there is a usual starting setup. One could also, however, think of a chess game after the first move as a different game, with a different setup. So each position is also called a game.\nGames have the notation {L|R}. formula_1 are the games the left player can move to. formula_2 are the games the right player can move to. If you know chess notation, then the usual chess setup is the game \nThe dots \"...\" mean there are many moves, so not all are shown.\nChess is very complex. It is better to think of easier games. Nim, for example, is much simpler to think about. Nim is played like this:\nThe easiest game of Nim starts with no counters at all! In such a case, neither player can move. That is shown as , or 0). If instead right moves first, there will be no more moves for left. So both left and right can make a move to 0. That is shown as , or {0|0}. The first player to move will win. Games equal to {0|0} are very important. They are written with the symbol, * (star)."}
{"id": "3693", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3693", "title": "Nim", "text": "Nim is a simple game used for examples in combinatorial game theory. The rules of nim are simple:\nThere is a simple mathematical strategy to play the game perfectly. If both players play perfectly, the winner is determined by the initial setup."}
{"id": "3694", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3694", "title": "CGT", "text": ""}
{"id": "3695", "revid": "371", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3695", "title": "Mathematic", "text": ""}
{"id": "3696", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3696", "title": "Windows operating system", "text": ""}
{"id": "3697", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3697", "title": "Blue", "text": "Blue is one of the colors of the rainbow that people can see. It is one of the seven colors of the rainbow along with red, orange, yellow, green, indigo and violet. Apart from indigo and violet, it has the shortest wavelength of these colors (about 470 nanometers).\nBlue is the color of the Earth's sky and sea. Earth looks blue when seen from outer space by astronauts.\nBlue is a color used to show coldness. It is also one of the colors your lips can turn if you are chilly.\nBlue is the color of a \"bluebird\". A blue jay is the color blue.\nMeaning of blue.\nThe color blue is sometimes associated with sadness, which may be where the name of the music style The Blues comes from.\nBlue is a color of the Jewish religion.\nIn Western cultures since the 1940s, blue is associated with men/boys, while pink is associated with women/girls. Before the 1940s, it was the other way around, so blue was for women/girls and pink was for men/boys. Nobody knows exactly why it changed."}
{"id": "3702", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3702", "title": "Memory", "text": "Memory is the personal record of past experiences. It is the brain's ability to store information to use later. The Greeks considered memory (Mnemosyne) as the mother of Muses, for without her there would be no art and no science. \nMemory is studied in sciences known as \"cognitive psychology\". \nThere are two types of memory: short-term and long-term memory, or known as working memory and reference memory."}
{"id": "3703", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3703", "title": "Symbols", "text": ""}
{"id": "3705", "revid": "581219", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3705", "title": "Animals", "text": ""}
{"id": "3706", "revid": "1141202", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3706", "title": "Murder", "text": "Murder is when one person kills another person on purpose. If a person does something that makes someone else die, without the intention of killing, it is homicide and may be manslaughter. An accident caused by carelessness may be negligent homicide. Sometimes, a death caused by someone else may not be a crime, for example killing in self-defense.\nA person who commits murder is called a murderer. The legal definition of \"murder\" and \"manslaughter\" may be different in different countries. A killing in war is not usually called \"murder\" by those who fight in the war. Killing in self defense is usually not \"murder\", but sometimes manslaughter. Some countries do not even have manslaughter as a legal concept, and only have murder; the countries that do not have manslaughter charge with murder instead. In fact, the United States did not have manslaughter on the books until the 20th century. England was the first country to indoctrinate manslaughter, and the United States was second. \nMost common circumstances for murder in the United States (1999).\nA total of 12,658 murders were reported in 1999 in the U.S., including 1,903 without a specified reason, and 3,779 for which the reasons were unknown.\nWorst cities for murder in the United States (1999).\nNew York's status as the murder capital of the world improved during the 1990s. What follows are the number of murders for 1999:\nAttempted murder.\nAttempted murder is a crime. Attempted murder, or \"attempt murder\" in common law countries, also sometimes called \"murder attempt\", is when someone tries to kill another person. Just planning a murder is not enough. The act must come close to, but does not actually take the life of the other person.\nIt was punishable by death and the execution was carried out in Ancient Egypt, Ancient Mesopotamia, the Indus River Valley, Ancient Greece, The Roman Empire, and of course, China, which is by far the most populated country in the world, to this day. As with murder, attempted murder is a mortal sin to the Catholic Church.\nThe Roman Empire carried out about ten thousand executions, most if not all beheadings, during its time, and there is no doubt that many of these were those convicted of attempted murder.\nAssassination.\n\"Assassination\" is a word which means murdering a prominent person for a reason. The word is most used when the person who was killed was a celebrity or was a person involved in politics. The people who carry out assassinations are called \"assassins\" or \"Hit-men\". An assassin may murder someone for political reasons, for money, or for other reasons, such as favors owed and revenge. Assassination is the same as murder and is mortal sin to the Catholic Church.\nThe word \"Assassin\" comes from Hashishin, a Muslim group that was active in the Middle East from the 8th to the 14th centuries. This secret society killed people for political and religious reasons. It is thought that the assassins were under the influence of hashish and opium during their killings or during their training. The word \"assassin\" comes from either \"hashashim\", the influence of the drugs, or \"hassansin\", after their leader, Hassan-i Sabbah.\nMurdersuicide.\nA murdersuicide is when a person kills someone else (murder), and then they kill themselves (suicide).\nNo one is tracking the number of murder\u2013suicides in the United States. However, medical studies estimate between 1,000 and 1,500 deaths per year in the United States are murder-suicides."}
{"id": "3707", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3707", "title": "Bird", "text": "Birds (Aves) are a group of animals with backbones which evolved from dinosaurs. Technically speaking, they are dinosaurs. \nBirds are endothermic. The heat loss from their bodies is slowed down by their feathers. \nModern birds are toothless: they have beaked jaws. They lay hard-shelled eggs. They have a high metabolic rate, a four-chambered heart and a strong yet lightweight skeleton.\nBirds live all over the world. They range in size from the 5 cm (2 in) bee hummingbird to the 2.70 m (9 ft) ostrich. They are the tetrapods with the most living species: about ten thousand. More than half of these are passerines, sometimes known as perching birds.\nBirds are the closest living relatives of the Crocodilia. This is because they are the two main survivors of a once huge group called the Archosaurs. \nModern birds are \"not\" descended from \"Archaeopteryx\". According to DNA evidence, \"modern\" birds (Neornithes) evolved in the long Upper Cretaceous period. More recent estimates showed that modern birds originated early in the Upper Cretaceous.\nPrimitive bird-like dinosaurs are in the broader group Avialae. They have been found back to the mid-Jurassic period, around 170 million years ago. Many of these early \"stem-birds\", such as \"Anchiornis\", were not yet capable of fully powered flight. Many had primitive characteristics like teeth in their jaws and long bony tails.p274\nThe Cretaceous\u2013Palaeogene extinction event 66 million years ago killed off all the non-avian dinosaur lines. Birds, especially those in the southern continents, survived this event and then migrated to other parts of the world. Diversification occurred around the Cretaceous\u2013Palaeogene extinction event. \nBirds have wings which are more or less developed depending on the species. The only known groups without wings are the extinct moa and elephant birds. Wings, which evolved from forelimbs, gave birds the ability to fly. Later, many groups evolved with reduced wings, such as ratites, penguins and many island species of birds. The digestive and respiratory systems of birds are also adapted for flight. Some bird species in aquatic environments, particularly seabirds and some waterbirds, have evolved as good swimmers.\nIn general, birds are effective, and inherit their behaviour almost entirely. The key elements of their life are inherited. It was a great discovery that birds never learn to fly. \nSo it is quite wrong to say, when a chick waves its wings in the nest \"It's learning to fly\". What the chick is doing is exercising its muscles. They develop the ability to fly \"automatically\" (assuming they are species that do fly). And if they are species which migrate, that behaviour is also inherited. Many species migrate over great distances each year. Other main features of their life may be inherited, though they can and do learn. Birds have good memories which they use, for example, when they search for food.\nSeveral bird species make and use tools. Some social species pass on some knowledge across generations, a form of culture. Birds are social. They communicate with visual signals, calls and bird songs. Most of their social behaviours are inherited, such as cooperative breeding and hunting, flocking and mobbing of predators.\nMost bird species are socially monogamous, usually for one breeding season at a time, sometimes for years, but rarely for life. Other species are polygynous (one male with many females) or, rarely, polyandrous (one female with many males). Birds produce offspring by laying eggs which are fertilised by sexual reproduction. They are often laid in a nest and incubated by the parents. Most birds have an extended period of parental care after hatching. Some birds, such as hens, lay eggs even when not fertilised, though unfertilised eggs do not produce offspring.\nMany species of birds are eaten by humans. Domesticated and undomesticated birds are sources of eggs, meat, and feathers. In English, domesticated birds are often called poultry, undomesticated birds are called game. Songbirds, parrots and other species are popular as pets. Guano, which is bird manure, is harvested for use as a fertiliser. Birds figure throughout human culture. About 120\u2013130 species have become extinct due to human activity since the 17th century and hundreds more before then. Human activity threatens about 1,200 bird species with extinction, though efforts are underway to protect them. Recreational bird-watching is an important part of the ecotourism industry.\nBird colours.\nBirds come in a huge range of colours. These colours can be useful to a bird in two ways. Camouflage colours help to hide the bird, and bright colours identify the bird to others of the same species. Often the male is brightly coloured while the female is camouflaged. The logic is as follows: the female carries the \"precious package\" of developing eggs. The male has to defend a territory, and the function of his colour and song is to let others know that \"this place is occupied\".\nBird camouflage.\nMany birds are brown, green or grey. These colours make a bird harder to be seen: they camouflage the bird. Brown is the most common colour. Brown birds include: sparrows, emus, thrushes, larks, eagles and falcons and the female birds of many species such as: wrens, ducks, blackbirds and peafowls. When a brown bird is in long grass or among tree trunks or rocks, it is \"camouflaged\". Birds that live in long grass often have brown feathers streaked with black which looks like shadows. A bittern is almost invisible in long reeds because its camouflage is helped by its posture (beak and head pointed upwards). Other birds, including starlings and mynas, are quite dark in colour, but are flecked with little spots that look like raindrops on leaves. Bird may also camouflage their nests.\nMany birds from hot countries are green or have some green feathers, particularly parrots. Birds that live in green trees often have green backs, even if they have bright-coloured breasts. From the back, the birds are camouflaged. This is very useful when sitting on a nest. The bird's bright-coloured breast is hidden. Budgerigars are bred in different colours such as blue, white and mauve, but in the wild, they are nearly all green and yellow. Even though they fly very well, they normally spend a lot of time on the ground, eating grass seeds. Their yellow and black striped back helps to hide them in the shadows made by long dry grass, while their green breasts are a similar colour to the leaves of gum trees.\nGrey birds include most pigeons and doves, cranes, storks and herons. Grey birds are often rock-living birds like pigeons or birds that sit on dead tree trunks looking like a broken branch. Water birds like herons often have a pale grey colour which makes it harder for a fish to notice that the bird is standing, looking down for something to catch. Water birds, no matter what colour they are on top, are often white underneath, so that when a fish looks up, the bird looks like part of the sky.\nBlack birds include crows, ravens and male blackbirds. Some birds that are dark colours spend quite a lot of time on the ground, hopping around in the shadows under bushes. Among these birds are the male blackbird and the satin bowerbird which is not black but very dark blue. Crows and ravens often perch high on bare trees in the winter, where their black shape against the sky looks like the dark bare branches.\nNoticeable colours.\nMany birds are not camouflaged, but stand out with vivid colours. They are usually male birds whose females are dull and camouflaged. The function of the colours is two-fold. First, the colours help them get mates, and second, the colours identify them to other males of the same species. Many birds are territorial, especially in the nesting season. They give out territory sounds and are easily seen. This lets other males know they will defend their territory. It sends out a \"look elsewhere\" signal to their competitors.\nSome birds are famous for their colour and are named for it, such as the bluebird, the azure kingfisher, the golden pheasant, the scarlet macaw, the violet wren and the robin.\nMany other birds are very brightly coloured, in countless combinations. Some of the most colourful birds are quite common, like pheasants, peacocks, domestic fowl and parrots. Colourful small birds include blue tits, the goldfinches, hummingbirds, fairy wrens and bee eaters (which are also called rainbow birds). Some birds, like those of the bird of paradise in Papua New Guinea have such beautiful feathers that they have been hunted for them.\nThe peafowl is the best example of a display of colour to attract a mate. Also the male domestic fowl and junglefowl have long shiny feathers above his tail and also long neck feathers that may be a different colour to his wings and body. There are only a very few types of birds (like the eclectus parrot) where the female is more colourful than the male.\n\"Pied birds\" are black and white. Black and white birds include magpies, pied geese, pelicans and Australian magpies (which are not really magpies at all). Pied birds often have brightly coloured beaks and legs of yellow or red. The silver pheasant, with its long white tail striped with fine bars of black, has a brightly coloured face.\nFlight.\nMost birds can fly, and if they do, then the ability is inherited, not learnt. They fly by pushing through the air with their wings. The curved surfaces of the wings cause air currents (wind) which lift the bird. Flapping keeps the air current moving to create lift and also moves the bird forward.\nSome birds can glide on air currents without flapping. Many birds use this method when they are about to land. Some birds can also hover in the air. This method is used by birds of prey such as falcons that are looking for something to eat. Seagulls are also good at hovering, particularly if there is a strong breeze. The most expert hovering birds are tiny hummingbirds which can beat their wings both backwards and forwards and can stay quite still in the air while they dip their long beaks into flowers to feed on the sweet nectar. \nTypes of flight.\nDifferent types of birds have different needs. Their wings have evolved to suit their lifestyle. Large birds of prey, such as eagles, spend a lot of time soaring on the wind. They have wings that are large and broad. The main flight feathers are long and wide. They help the eagle to stay on rising air currents without using much energy, while the eagle looks at the ground below, to find the next meal. When the eagle sees some small creature move, it can close its wings and fall from the sky like a missile, opening its great wings again to slow down as it comes to land. The world's largest eagle, the Philippine eagle has a wingspan of about 2 m (6.7\u00a0ft) wide.\nBirds that live in grassland areas or open forests and feed on fruit, insects and reptiles often spend a lot of time flying short journeys looking for food and water. They have wings that are shaped in a similar way to eagles, but rounder and not as good for soaring. These include many Australian birds like cockatoos.\nBirds such as geese that migrate from one country to another fly very long distances. Their wings are big and strong, because the birds are large. They stock up on food for the long flight. Migrating water birds usually form family groups of 1230 birds. They fly very high, making use of long streams of air that blow from north to south in different seasons. They are well organised, often flying in a V pattern. The geese at the back do not have to flap so hard; they are pulled on by the wind of the ones at the front. Every so often, they change the leader so that the front bird, who does most work and sets the pace, can have a rest. Geese and swans are the highest-flying birds, reaching 8,000 metres or more when on migration. Geese often \"honk\" loudly while they are flying. It is thought that they do this to support the leader and help the young ones.\nBirds that fly very quickly, such as swifts and swallows, have long narrow pointed wings. These birds need great speed because they eat insects, catching most of them while they are flying. These birds also migrate. They often collect in huge flocks of thousands of birds that move together like a whirling cloud.\nBirds that live in bushes and branches have triangular wings that help the bird change direction. Many forest birds are expert at getting up speed by flapping and then gliding steadily among the trees, tilting to avoid things as they go. Members of the kingfisher family are expert at this type of flying.\nBirds such as owls that hunt at night have wings with soft rounded feathers so that they do not flap loudly. Birds that are awake at night are called \"nocturnal\" birds. Birds that are awake during the day are \"diurnal\".\nWandering albatross might spend several years without coming to land. They can sleep while gliding. Arctic terns nest every one to three years.\nFlocks.\nFlocks of birds can be very highly organised in a way that takes care of all the flock members. Studies of small flocking birds like tree sparrows show that they clearly communicate with each other, as sometimes thousands of birds may fly in close formation and spiral patterns without colliding (or flying into each other).\nTwo common behaviours in flocking birds are guarding and reconnaissance. When a flock of birds is feeding it is common for one bird to perch on a high place to keep guard over the flock. In the same way, when a flock is asleep, often, one bird will remain awake. It is also common for large flocks to send one or two birds ahead of them when they are flying to a new area. The look-out birds can spy the lie of the land to find food, water and good places to perch. Mixed feeding flocks occur, and can help to spot predators.\nFlightless birds.\nSome birds do not fly. Flightlessness in birds has evolved many times.\nThese include running birds like ostriches and emus and ocean-living birds, the large penguin family. Birds on islands have usually lost the power of flight. This is to their advantage because birds with the power of flight can be blown off their island during a storm. The same ability which got them to the island may later take them away in a storm.\nOstriches and emus do not need to fly because although they feed and nest on the ground, their great size and their speed is their protection. Some other ground-feeding birds have not been so lucky. Some birds such as the dodo and the kiwi were ground-feeding birds that lived in safety on islands where there was nothing dangerous to eat them. They lost the power of flight. Kiwis are endangered because European settlement to New Zealand brought animals like cats, dogs and rats which kill kiwis and eat their eggs. However, kiwis and also the rare New Zealand ground parrot have survived. In the case of dodos, they were fat and disgusting in taste. All the same, they were killed and eaten by sailors until there was none left. Other flightless birds which have disappeared are the great auk and the moa.\nPenguins are a very successful group of birds. They are a clade. They spend half their time on land. Their wings are adapted to life in the sea and have become flippers which let them in swim fast. They catch fish at sea, where they are in danger from seals.\nDigestion.\nModern birds do not have teeth, and many swallow their prey whole. Nevertheless, they must break up food before it is digested. First of all, along their throat (oesophagus) they have a crop. This stores food items before digestion. That way a bird can eat several items, and then fly off to a quiet spot to digest them. \nTheir stomach comes next, with two very different parts. One part is like a straight hollow rod (the \"proventriculus\") which secretes mild hydrochloric acid and an enzyme to break down protein. The other part of the stomach is the gizzard. This is muscular, and grinds up the contents. In herbivorous birds the gizzard contains some gastroliths (small stones or pieces of grit). Bones of fish will mostly be dissolved by the stomach acid. The partly digested and ground-up food now goes to the intestine, where digestion is completed, and most contents are absorbed. Anything indigestible, for example remains of feathers, is regurgitated via the mouth, not the cloaca.\nThe system is effective, and carnivorous birds can swallow quite large prey. A blue heron can swallow a fish as large as a carp successfully. Raptors eat by holding the prey down with a foot, and tearing it apart with their beak.\nReproduction.\nMating.\nAlthough birds are warm-blooded creatures like mammals, they do not give birth to live young. They lay eggs as reptiles do, but the shell of a bird's egg is hard. The baby bird grows inside the egg, and after a few weeks hatches (breaks out of the egg).\nBirds in cold climates usually have a breeding season once a year in the spring. Migratory birds can have two springs and two mating seasons in a year. \nNinety-five per cent of bird species are socially monogamous. These birds pair for at least the length of the breeding season. In some cases this arrangement lasts until the death of one of the pair. Monogamy clearly helps if females need males' help to raise a brood successfully. It has other practical advantages: the nest is never left without defence. Birds are generally small, and they have many potential enemies.\nSome birds mate for life, like married couples. These birds include pigeons, geese, and cranes. Other birds look for new partners each year. For birds that choose new mates, part of the breeding season is display. The male bird will do all sorts of things to attract females. These include singing, dancing, showing off the feathers and building a beautiful nest. Some male birds have splendid feathers for attracting females. The most famous is the peacock who can spread the feathers above his tail into a huge fan. \nOther mating systems do occur in some species. Polygyny, polyandry, polygamy, polygynandry, and promiscuity do happen. Polygamous breeding systems arise when females are able to raise broods without the help of males. Some species may use more than one system depending on the circumstances.\nNesting.\nOnce the birds have found partners, they find a suitable place to lay eggs. The idea of what is a suitable place differs between species, but most build bird nests. The bird is driven by a hormone (estradiol E2) to prepare a place for the eggs to hatch. Birds' nests may be up a tree, in a cliff or on the ground according to species. When filled with eggs they are almost always guarded by one of the pair. In fact it is virtually impossible for the eggs to survive if one of the parents dies.\nRobins will make a beautiful little round nest of woven grass and carefully line it with feathers, bits of fluff and other soft things. Swallows like to nest near other swallows. They make nests from little blobs of clay, often on a beam near the roof of a building where it is well sheltered. Many birds like a hollow tree to nest in. Eagle's nests are often just piles of dead wood on the top of the tallest tree or mountain. Scrub turkeys scratch together a huge pile of leaves that may be 10 metres across. Guillemots lay their eggs on rock shelves with no nest at all. Their eggs are shaped so that they roll around in circles and do not fall off cliffs. A cuckoo does not make its own nest. It lays its egg in the nest of another bird and leaves it for them to care for. The cuckoo eggs are camouflaged to look like the host's eggs.\nWhen the nest has been prepared, the birds mate so that the eggs are fertilised and the chicks will start growing. Unlike mammals, birds (and reptiles) only have one opening as the exit hole for body fluids, and for reproduction. The opening is called the cloaca. A female bird, called a hen, has two ovaries, of which the left one usually produces eggs.\nMost male birds have no sex organs that can be seen. But inside the male are two testes which produce sperm which is stored in the cloaca. Birds mate by rubbing their cloacas together, although with some birds, particularly large water birds, the male has a sort of a penis inside the cloaca.\nHatching.\nOnce the hen has mated, she produces fertile eggs which have chicks growing inside them. She lays the eggs in the nest. There might be just one egg or a number of them, called a clutch. Emus might lay as many as fifteen huge dark green eggs in a clutch. After the eggs are laid, they are incubated, or kept warm so the chicks form inside. Most birds stay together for the whole nesting season, and one advantage is that the work is shared. Many birds take turns sitting on the eggs, so that each adult can feed.\nThis is not always the case. With emus, the male does all the sitting and all the baby-minding. With emperor penguins it is also the male that cares for the egg. There is only one egg, which he keeps on his feet and under his feathers, standing in a big group of males without feeding until the chick is hatched. While the eggs are hatching, the females are at sea, feeding, so that they can care for the chicks when they return.\nSome birds put the eggs inside or on top of the mound of leaves and twigs. The mound acts like a compost heap. The decomposition of the rotting leaves causes the temperature to rise. This is heat released by the chemical action of bacterial and fungal respiration. It is the same reaction as that which keeps mammals and birds at a high temperature. The parents leave the mound. When the chicks hatch, they are able to feed themselves.\nMany small birds take 2\u20134 weeks to hatch eggs. Albatrosses take 80 days. During this time the female loses a lot of her body weight.\nThe quickest hatching time is for the cuckoo. Some types of cuckoos take only 10 days. This means that when they hatch in the nest of their \"foster parents\", the eggs that the parents have laid are not yet ready. Newborn cuckoos are naked, blind and ugly, but they are strong. They get under any eggs that are in the nest and throw them out before they hatch. That means that the cuckoo has the whole care of both parents. Baby cuckoos grow fast and often get bigger than the parents who feed them.\nWhen baby birds hatch, in most types of birds, they are fed by both parents, and sometimes by older aunties as well. Their mouths are open all the time and are often very brightly coloured, which acts as a \"releaser\", a trigger which stimulates the parent to feed them. For birds that eat grain and fruit, the parents eat and partly digest the food for the babies. It is then vomited carefully into the baby's mouth.\nFamilies.\nMany birds, particularly those that mate for life, are very sociable and keep together in a family group which might be anything from 4 or 6 adult birds and their young to a very large flock.\nAs chicks grow they change the fluffy down that covers them as babies for real feathers. At this stage they are called fledglings. Other family members may help care for fledgling chicks, feeding them and protecting them from attack while parents are feeding. When the fledglings have their new feathers, they come out of the nest to learn to fly. In some types of birds, like pigeons, the parents watch over this and as the young ones get stronger, will give them flying lessons, teaching them how to glide, how to fly in spirals and how to land like an expert.\nCommunication.\nMost birds are social animals, at least part of the time. They communicate to each other using sounds and displays.\nAlmost all birds make sounds to communicate. The types of noises that vary greatly. Some birds can sing, and they are called songbirds or passerines. Examples are robins, larks, canaries, thrushes, nightingales. Corvids are passerines, but they do not sing. Birds that are not songbirds include: pigeons, seagulls, eagles, owls and ducks. Parrots are not songbirds, even though they can be taught to sing human songs.\nSongbirds.\nAll birds make noises (\"bird vocalisation\"), but not all sing. Songbirds are passerines, many of which have beautiful melodic songs. Songs have different functions. Danger cries are different from territorial songs and mating calls are a third type. Fledgling may also have different calls from adults. Recognition calls for partners are quite common.\nAs to where the song comes from, there are three kinds of species:\nMost singing birds that are kept as pets, like canaries, have several tunes and some variations.\nThe same species of bird will sing different songs in different regions. A good example of this is the currawong. This is an Australia bird which is like a black and white crow. In the autumn, families get together in large flocks and do a lot of singing. Currawongs from some areas sing much more complex songs than others. Generally, currawongs from the Blue Mountains are the finest singers. The song of the currawong can be sung as a solo, but is often performed as a choir. One bird will take the lead and sing \"Warble-warble-warble-warble!\" All the other birds will join in and sing \"Wooooooo!\". When all the birds know the song, the choir will sing the \"Warble\" part and the soloist will sing the \"Woo!\". The song changes from year to year and from place to place.\nLorenz's studies.\nThe Austrian naturalist Konrad Lorenz studied the way in which birds communicate, or talk to each other. He found that each type of bird had a number of sounds which they made automatically, when ever they felt a certain way. Every sound had an action that went with it. So, if the bird was frightened, it acted frightened and made a frightened sound. This told the other birds around it that something frightening was happening.\nIf a flock of birds were flying over a field, they would be calling \"Fly! Fly!\" But a hungry bird, seeing something good to eat down below might start calling \"Food! Food!\" If other birds were also hungry, they would make the same call until more birds were calling \"Food! Food!\" than \"Fly! Fly!\". At this point, the mind of the flock would be changed. Some of the birds would start to yell \"Fly downwards! Fly downwards!\" as they sank from the sky, until the whole flock was all noisily calling the same thing.\nThese communication sounds are often short hard sounds like: chirps, squeaks, squawks and twitters. Sometimes the calls are longer and more musical. They include the \"Rookety-coo\" sound of a pigeon and the \"Cockadoodledoo!\" of a rooster. The bird cannot change these sounds. They always make them in the same way. The bird is locked into making each sound every time a particular idea comes into its head. The connection between how they feel and how they call is innate: they are born with it. Some calls in some species are learnt. Then, it is the tendency to learn which is inherited.\nThe Jackdaw of Altenberg.\nKonrad Lorenz noticed that when birds sing, they often use a lot of their regular calls as part of the song. Lorenz had a flock of jackdaws which were scattered during World War II. One day, an old bird returned. For many months she sat on the chimney singing her song, but in the song she kept making the call which Lorenz knew meant \"Come home! Come home!\" One day, to the great surprise of Lorenz, a male bird flew from a passing flock and joined her on the chimney. Lorenz was sure that it was her long-lost \"husband\" who had found his way home at last.\nEvolution and taxonomy.\nPalaeontologists have found some exceptional places (lagerst\u00e4tten) where fossils of early birds are found. The preservation is so good that on the best examples impressions of their feathers can be seen, and sometimes even the remains of meals they have eaten. From these remains we know that birds evolved from small carnivorous dinosaurs (theropods) in the Jurassic period. They radiated into a huge variety in the Lower Cretaceous. At the same time, their direct competitors, the pterosaurs, dwindled in numbers and variety, and became extinct at the end of the Mesozoic.\nBirds are classified by taxonomists as 'Aves' (Avialae). Birds are the only living descendants of dinosaurs (strictly speaking, they \"are\" dinosaurs). Birds and Crocodilia are the only living members of the once-dominant Archosaur reptiles.\nDefinition.\nThe class Aves is was defined (1990) as all the descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and \"Archaeopteryx lithographica\". But it is not certain that \"Archaeopteryx\" is the ancestor of modern birds. The transition to flight may have happened a number of times, and probably did. The researchers offered four definitions. Birds can be: \nThe first bird-like creatures.\n\"Archaeopteryx\", from the Upper Jurassic some 150\u2013145 million years ago (mya), was for a long time the earliest known bird which could fly. It is famous, because it was one of the first important fossils found after Charles Darwin published his ideas about evolution in the 19th century. By modern standards, \"Archaeopteryx\" could not fly very well. Other early fossil birds are, for example, \"Confuciusornis\", \"Anchiornis huxlei\" and other Paraves.\nMany fossils of early birds and small dinosaurs have been discovered in the Liaoning Province of Northeast China. These include \"Anchiornis huxlei\", from about 160 mya. The fossils show that most small theropod dinosaurs had feathers. These deposits have preserved them so well that the impressions of their feathers can be clearly seen. This leads us to think that feathers evolved first as heat insulation and only later for flight. The origin of birds lies in these small feathered dinosaurs.\nPalaeontologists now agree that birds are included in Maniraptora group of dinosaurs. This explains why we say that birds are living dinosaurs.\nEvolution of modern birds.\nA leading authority says \"Most living birds have fossil representatives in the Cenozoic\"... \"Key problems remain in understanding bird phylogeny... we seem to understand as little about the relationships among living birds as among Cretaceous birds\"\".\nBirds and people.\nSome birds are eaten as food. Most usually it is the chicken and its eggs, but people often also eat geese, pheasants, turkeys and ducks. Other birds are sometimes eaten are: emus, ostriches, pigeons, grouse, quails, doves, woodcocks and even songbirds. Some species have died out because they have been hunted for food, for example the dodo and the passenger pigeon.\nMany species have learned how to get food from people. The number of birds of these species has grown because of it. Seagulls and crows find food from garbage dumps. The feral pigeon (\"Columba livia\"), sparrows (\"Passer domesticus\" and starlings (\"Sturnus vulgaris\") live in large numbers in towns and cities all over the world.\nSometimes people also use working birds. For example, homing pigeons carry messages. Nowadays people sometimes race them for sport. People also use falcons for hunting, and cormorants for fishing. In the past, people in mines often used a canary to see if there were bad gas methane in the air.\nPeople often have colorful birds such as parrots and mynahs as pets. These intelligent birds are popular because they can copy human talking. Because of this, some people trap birds and take them to other countries to sell. This is not usually allowed these days. Most pet birds are specially bred and are sold in pet shops.\nPeople can catch some bird diseases, for example: psittacosis, salmonellosis, campylobacteriosis, Newcastle's disease, mycobacteriosis, influenza, giardiasis and cryptosporiadiosis. In 2005, there was an epidemic of bird influenza spreading through some parts of the world, often called avian flu.\nSome people have birdboxes in their gardens to give birds a place to nest and bird tables where birds can get food and water in very cold or very dry weather. This lets people see some small birds close up which are normally hidden away in bushes and trees.\nBird orders.\nThe following is a listing of all bird orders:\nBird population decreasing.\nA report produced by BirdLife International every five years measures the population of birds worldwide. One in every eight types of birds is now \"in decline\"."}
{"id": "3711", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3711", "title": "Freedom of speech", "text": "Freedom of speech is the right to state one's opinions and ideas without being stopped or punished. Sometimes this is also called Freedom of expression. Freedom of speech is thought to also include freedom of the press and Freedom of information. However, new laws are usually needed to allow information to be used easily.\nMost people think freedom of speech is necessary for a democratic government. In countries without free speech, people might be afraid to say what they think. Then, the government does not know what the people want. If the government does not know what they want, it cannot respond to their wants. Without free speech, the government does not have to worry as much about doing what the people want. Some people say this is why some governments do not allow free speech: they do not want to be criticised, or they fear there would be revolution if everyone knew everything that was happening in the country.\nA well-known liberal thinker, John Stuart Mill, believed that freedom of speech is important because the society that people live in has a right to hear people's ideas. It's not just important because everyone should have a right to express him or herself.\nFew countries with \"free speech\" let everything be said. For example, the United States Supreme Court said that it was against the law to shout \"fire\" in a crowded theater if there is no fire, because this might cause people to panic. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights also says that it is not okay to cause national, racial or religious hatred. Also, some countries have laws against hate speech. \nAs Tocqueville pointed out, people may be hesitant to speak freely not because of fear of government punishment but because of social pressures. When an individual announces an unpopular opinion, he or she may face the disdain of their community or even be subjected to violent reactions. While this type of suppression of speech is even more difficult to prevent than government suppression is, there are questions about whether it truly falls within the ambit of freedom of speech, which is typically regarded as a legal right to be exercised against the government, or immunity from governmental action."}
{"id": "3712", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3712", "title": "Democratic", "text": ""}
{"id": "3713", "revid": "279", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3713", "title": "Vatican", "text": ""}
{"id": "3715", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3715", "title": "Banana", "text": "A banana is the common name for a type of fruit and also the name for the herbaceous plants that grow it. These plants belong to the genus \"Musa\". They are native to the tropical region of southeast Asia.\nIt is thought that bananas were grown for food for the first time in Papua New Guinea. Today, they are cultivated in tropical regions around the world. Most banana plants are grown for their fruits, which botanically are a type of berry. Some are grown as ornamental plants, or for their fibres.\nThere are about 110 different species of banana. In popular culture and commerce, \"banana\" usually refers to the soft and sweet kind, also known as \"dessert bananas\". Other kinds, or cultivars, of banana have a firmer, starchier fruit. Those are usually called plantains. Plantains are mostly used for cooking or fibre.\nOther than being used as food, beer can be made by fermenting the juice of certain cultivars in Africa, known as \"beer bananas\". The ash of bananas can be used to make soap. In Asia, bananas are often planted to provide shade to plants that like shade, for example coffee, cocoa, nutmeg or black pepper. Because of this, banana plants can often be found in plantations of other crops.\nBanana plant.\nThe banana plant is the largest herbaceous flowering plant. Banana plants are often mistaken for trees. Bananas have a \"false stem\" (called \"pseudostem\"), which is made by the lower part of the leaves. This pseudostem can grow to be two to eight meters tall. Each pseudostem grows from a corm. A pseudostem is able to produce a single bunch of bananas. After fruiting, the pseudostem dies and is replaced. When most bananas are ripe, they turn yellow or, sometimes, red. Unripe bananas are green.\nBanana leaves grow in a spiral and may grow long and wide. They are easily torn by the wind, which results in a familiar, frayed look.\nFruit.\nThe banana fruits grow from a banana blossom in hanging clusters, also called a \"bunch\" or \"banana stem\". The fruits grow in rows called \"tiers\" or \"hands\". There can be as many as twenty fruits to a hand, and as many as twenty tiers in a bunch. A bunch usually weighs between 30 and 50 kilograms (65 to 110 pounds).\nA single fruit weighs about 125 grams (4.4 ounces) on average; about three quarters of this is water.\nEach banana (or \"finger\") has a protective outer layer (called \"peel\" or \"skin\"). There is a fleshy part inside that readily spilts into three segments. It is the only known tri-segmented fruit in the world. Both the skin and inner part can be eaten. Western cultures generally eat the inside raw and throw away the skin. Some Asian cultures eat both the skin and the inside cooked. Each fruit has many \"strings\" that run between the skin and the inner part. \nBananas have a lot of vitamin B6, vitamin C, and potassium.\nGrowing and trading bananas.\nBananas are grown in at least 107 countries. The banana species growing in the wild have fruits with many hard, large seeds, but almost all bananas grown to be eaten have seedless fruits. Bananas are classified either as dessert bananas or as green cooking bananas. Almost all export bananas are of the dessert types. Only about ten to fifteen percent of all production is for export. Dessert bananas change their color and usually turn yellow, when they are ripe; plantains and bananas generally used for cooking stay green. Certain bananas have other colors when ripe.\nThe countries that produce the most bananas include India, Brazil, China, Ecuador and the Philippines. The top five countries that exported bananas were Ecuador, Costa Rica, the Philippines, Colombia and Guatemala. The United States, the European Union and Japan buy the most bananas. Bananas are among the most valuable agricultural export products; They provided about sixty percent of export earnings of Saint Lucia and about twelve percent of the Gross Domestic Product of the country, between 1994 and 1996.\nAllergies.\nSome people are allergic to bananas. There are two basic forms of these allergies. The first is known as oral allergy syndrome. Within an hour of eating a banana, swelling starts inside the mouth or throat. This allergy is related to allergies caused by pollen, like that of the birch tree. The other is similar to latex allergies. It causes urticaria and potentially serious upper gastrointestinal symptoms.\nOther uses of bananas.\nTextiles.\nThe fibre gained from the banana plant has been used to make textiles for a long time. In Japan, bananas have been grown to be used for clothing and in the house since at least the 13th century. In the Japanese system, the leaves and shoots are cut from the plant periodically to make sure they are soft. The harvested shoots must first be boiled in lye to prepare the fibres for the making of the yarn. These banana shoots produce fibres of varying degrees of softness. They can be used for yarns and textiles of different qualties, and for specific uses. For example, the outermost fibres of the shoots are the coarsest - they are good for tablecloths. The softest innermost fibres are desirable for kimono and kamishimo. This traditional Japanese banana cloth making process has many steps, all performed by hand.\nAnother system is used in Nepal. There the trunk of the banana plant is harvested instead. Small pieces of this trunk are then softened. The fibres are extracted mechanically, bleached, and dried. They are then sent to the Kathmandu Valley, where high-end rugs are produced. These rugs have a texture and general qualities similar to that of silk. These banana fibre rugs are woven by traditional Nepalese hand-knotted methods.\nPaper.\nBanana fiber is also used to make \"banana paper\". There are two different kinds of banana paper: paper made from the bark, and paper made from the fibre and from unused fruits."}
{"id": "3720", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3720", "title": "Biel/Bienne, Switzerland", "text": "Biel/Bienne (official name; \"Biel\" is German, \"Bienne\" is French) is an industrial town in Switzerland. It is in the part of Switzerland named Bern and near the city also named Bern. The town is known for many companies that make watches and machines. \nDescription.\nThe town of Biel, the capital of Swiss watch-making, lies at the end of Lake Biel, at the foot of the Jura Hills in the Lake Region. \nThe wonderful old town with its town church and its location as the gateway to the three Jura lakes (Lakes Biel, Lake Neuch\u00e2tel and Lake Murten) with vineyards on the hillsides and extensive vegetable cultivation make the town very attractive.\nBiel is the only town in Switzerland in which German and French are spoken side by side We can feel the relaxed mentality here coming from the mixture of these three languages. \nBiel was awarded the Wakker Prize in 2004 by the Swiss Heritage Society for the way it conserved its 20th century buildings, especially the \u2018new construction\u2019 from the 1920s and 30s. \nSwatch, Rolex, Omega, Tissot, Movado and Mikron all come from this town. But Biel has also become important in the field of other industries and in communication. \nIt is possible to travel on various routes along the lakes on passenger boats in summer. The day trip through all three Jura lakes is especially popular. Of course there are all types of water sports on Lake Biel.\nOld town.\nThe town of Biel was built by the Prince-Bishop of Bale between 1220 and 1230. The old town is the smallest part of Biel with only . Most buildings there still look as in the 18th century. The biggest part of the old town is without any traffic. There aren\u2019t any big stores or industries or any big companies. Each Saturday there is a market. The castle, \u201cthe ring\u201d and the theatre are very popular. The town church is on the \u201cRingplatz\u201d and was built between 1451 and 1470.There they burned the witches in the 18th century. From the 6 medieval city gates only one and two towers survived.\nHeritage sites.\nThe entire town of Biel is part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites. Several individual buildings in the old town have also been protected for their cultural heritage.\nThe Reformed City Church is one of the most important late-Gothic buildings in the Canton of Bern. The church has a main floor, two second floors and four small chapels. There are some wall-paintings in the church. Most windows are among the oldest ones in Switzerland. The church was first written about in an index in 1228. After a horrible fire in the old town the church was destroyed. It was rebuilt between 1367 and 1451. The town church got on a new organ on 6th November 2011. The church was closed for more than half a year to put the new organ in and to improve the inside of the church. It cost about 1,74 million Swiss francs. The old organ was sent to Poland.\nLanguage.\nAbout 57% of the people in Biel speak German as their mother tongue. The remaining 43% speak French as their mother tongue. That is why the city has two names."}
{"id": "3722", "revid": "323", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3722", "title": "Biel Mean Time", "text": ""}
{"id": "3723", "revid": "396686", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3723", "title": "Swatch Internet Time", "text": "Swatch Internet Time is a way to measure time invented in 1998 by the Swatch manufacturing firm in Biel/Bienne, Switzerland. Time is shown as an \"@\" mark with three numerals. The day starts with @000 for midnight. Noon is @500. Just before midnight is @999. The thousand parts which make up a day are called \"dot beats\" (.beats). Each dot beat is one minute and 26.4 seconds long. Midnight is the same as Central European Winter Time (UTC+1)and Internet Time is the same all over the world. It does not change during the Summer. People can use it to plan phone calls or Internet meetings. Most types of Linux can show Internet Time as the desktop clock."}
{"id": "3727", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3727", "title": "Test tube", "text": "A test tube is a kind of laboratory glassware, composed of a fingerlike length of glass tubing, open at the top, usually with a rounded lip at the top, and a rounded 'U' shaped bottom.\nThey range in size from a couple inches to several inches long, from a few millimeters to a couple centimeters in diameter. They are designed to allow easy heating of samples, to be held in a flame, and often are made of expansion-resistant glasses, such as borosilicate glass (known by brand-names such as Pyrex and Kimax).\nTests tubes are often preferred above beakers when multiple small chemical or biological samples have to be handled and/or stored.\nVacutainers are a type of test tube that can be used for both collection and storage of blood."}
{"id": "3729", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3729", "title": "Beaker", "text": "A beaker is a kind of laboratory glassware. A beaker is a cylinder with a lip and a spout (a bend in the rim of the beaker which makes it easier to pour liquids without spilling any). A beaker is usually about the same width as its height. This makes beakers very stable and easy to handle. They may be made of plastic, glass, or borosilicate glass. Some beakers have marks on them to show about how much volume of liquid they hold - these can not be used for exact measurements.\nBeakers are often used to make solutions and they are probably the most used piece of laboratory glassware. "}
{"id": "3730", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3730", "title": "Crucible", "text": "In chemistry, a crucible is a kind of laboratory equipment that is usually a small cup, about the size of a shot glass, made of porcelain or non-reactive metal. Crucibles are used to heat chemical compounds to very high temperatures using a gas burner. One of the earliest uses of platinum was as a material in crucibles. Metals such as nickel and zirconium are also used as a modern crucible material."}
{"id": "3732", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3732", "title": "Crucibles", "text": ""}
{"id": "3733", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3733", "title": "Beakers", "text": ""}
{"id": "3734", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3734", "title": "Test tubes", "text": ""}
{"id": "3735", "revid": "1086847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3735", "title": "Lithium", "text": "Lithium (from Greek \"lithos\" 'stone') is a soft, silver-white metal with symbol\u00a0Li. It is the third chemical element in the periodic table. This means that it has 3 protons in its nucleus and 3 electrons around it. Its atomic number is 3. Its mass number is 6.94. It has two common isotopes, 6Li and 7Li. 7Li is more common. 92.5% of lithium is 7Li. Lithium is a soft silvery metal that is very reactive. It is used in lithium batteries and certain medicines. \nProperties.\nPhysical properties.\nLithium is one of the alkali metals. Lithium is a silvery solid metal (when freshly cut). It is very soft. Thus it can be cut easily with a knife. It melts at a low temperature. It is very light, similar to wood. It is the least dense metal and the least dense element in a solid or liquid state. It can hold more heat than any other solid element. It conducts heat and electricity easily. \nChemical properties.\nIt will react with water, giving off hydrogen to form a basic solution (lithium hydroxide). Because of this, lithium must be stored in petroleum jelly. Sodium and potassium can be stored in oil but lithium cannot because it is so light. It will just float on the oil and not be protected by it. \nLithium also reacts with halogens. It can react with nitrogen gas to make lithium nitride. It reacts with air to make a black tarnish and then a white powder of lithium hydroxide and lithium carbonate.\nChemical compounds.\nLithium forms chemical compounds with only one oxidation state: +1. Most of them are white and unreactive. They make a bright red color when heated in a flame. They are a little toxic. Most of them dissolve in water. Lithium carbonate is less soluble in water than the other alkali metal carbonates like sodium carbonate.\nOccurrence.\nIt does not occur as an element in nature. It only is in the form of lithium compounds. The ocean has a large amount of lithium in it. Certain granites have large amounts of lithium. Most living things have lithium in them. There are some places where much lithium is in the salt. Some silicates have lithium in them.\nHistory.\nLithium (Greek \"lithos\", meaning \"stone\") was discovered by Johann Arfvedson in 1817. In 1818, Christian Gmelin observed that lithium salts give a bright red color in flame. W.T. Brande and Sir Humphrey Davy later used electrolysis on lithium oxide to isolate the element. Lithium was first used in greases. Then nuclear weapons became a big use of lithium. Lithium was also used to make glass melt easier and make aluminium oxide melt easier in making aluminium. Now lithium is used mainly in batteries.\nIt was apparently given the name \"lithium\" because it was discovered from a mineral, while other common alkali metals were first discovered in plant tissue.\nPreparation.\nIt is made by getting lithium chloride from pools and springs. The lithium chloride is melted and electrolyzed. This makes liquid lithium and chlorine.\nUses.\nAs an element.\nIts main use is in batteries. Lithium is used as an anode in the lithium battery. It has more power than batteries with zinc, like alkaline cells. Lithium ion batteries also have lithium in them, though not as an element. It is also used in heat transfer alloys. Lithium is used to make organolithium compounds. They are used for very strong bases.\nIt is used to make special glasses and ceramics, including the Mount Palomar telescope's 200 inch mirror. Lithium is the lightest known metal and can be alloyed with aluminium, copper, manganese, and cadmium to make strong, lightweight metals for aircraft.\nIn chemical compounds.\nLithium compounds are used in some drugs known as mood stabilizers. Lithium niobate is used in radio transmitters in cell phones. Some lithium compounds are also used in ceramics. Lithium chloride can absorb water from other things. Some lithium compounds are used to make soap and grease. Lithium carbonate is used as a drug to treat manic depression disorder. Lithium carbonate is used for the treatment of bipolar disease and other mental illness conditions.\nOrganic chemistry.\nOrganolithium compounds are used to make polymers and fine chemicals. Many lithium compounds are used as reagents to make organic compounds. Some lithium compounds like lithium aluminium hydride, lithium triethylborohydride, n-butyllithium and tert-butyllithium are commonly used as very strong bases called superbases.\nOther uses.\nLithium compounds are used as pyrotechnic colorants and oxidizers in red fireworks and flares. Lithium chloride and lithium bromide are used as desiccants for gas streams. Lithium hydroxide and lithium peroxide are used to remove carbon dioxide and purify the air in spacecrafts and submarines. Lithium hydroxide, lithium peroxide and lithium perchlorate are used in oxygen candles that supply submarines with oxygen.\nLithium aluminum hydride can also be used as a solid fuel by itself. Lithium hydride that contains lithium-6 is used in thermonuclear weapons.\nSafety.\nLithium reacts with water, making irritating smoke and heat. It is not as dangerous as the other alkali metals. Lithium hydroxide is very corrosive.\nIsotopes.\nThere are 5 isotopes of Lithium having respectively 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 neutrons in the nucleus. The most common isotope in nature is 3Li7 which makes up 92.58 % of the total. The second isotope which is widely available is 3Li6 which makes up 7.42 % of the total. The other 3 isotopes exist in very small quantities. The atomic mass of Lithium is 6.939."}
{"id": "3736", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3736", "title": "Beryllium", "text": "Beryllium is in group 2 of the periodic table, so it is an alkaline earth metal. It is grayish (slightly gray) in color. It has an atomic number of 4 and is symbolized by the letters Be. It is toxic and should not be handled without proper training.\nBeryllium has 4 electrons, 4 protons, and 5 neutrons.\nBeryllium has one of the highest melting points of the light metals: 1560 K (1287 \u00b0C). It is added to other metals to make stronger alloys. Beryllium-copper alloy is used in tools because it does not make sparks. \nAt standard temperature and pressure, beryllium resists oxidation when exposed to oxygen.\nBeryllium is best known for the chemical compounds it forms. Beryllium combines with aluminium, silicon and oxygen to make a mineral called beryl. Emerald and aquamarine are two varieties of beryl which are used as gemstones in jewelry.\nSince it has a very high stiffness to weight ratio, beryllium is used to make the diaphragms in some high-end speakers.\nUses.\nBeryllium is used to make jet aircrafts, guided missiles, spacecraft, and satellites, including the James Webb telescope. Beryllium can reflect neutrons, and thin foils of beryllium are sometimes used in nuclear weapons as the outer layer of the plutonium pits. Beryllium is also used in fuel rods for CANDU reactors. Beryllium is used to make many dental alloys.\nRarity.\nIt is a relatively rare element in the universe. It usually occurs when larger atomic nuclei have split up. In stars, beryllium is depleted because it is fused and builds larger elements."}
{"id": "3741", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3741", "title": "Data compression", "text": "Data compression is a set of steps for packing data into a smaller space, while allowing for the original data to be seen again. Compression is a two-way process: a compression algorithm can be used to make a data package smaller, but it can also be run the other way, to decompress the package into its original form. Data compression is useful in computing to save disk space, or to reduce the bandwidth used when sending data (e.g., over the internet). \nLossless compression.\nLossless compression packs data in such a way that the compressed package can be decompressed, and the data can be pulled out exactly the same as it went in. This is very important for computer programs and archives, since even a very small change in a computer program will make it unusable.\nThis type of compression works by reducing how much waste space is in a piece of data. For example, if you receive a data package which contains \"AAAAABBBB\", you could compress that into \"5A4B\", which has the same meaning but takes up less space. This type of compression is called \"run-length encoding\", because you define how long the \"run\" of a character is. In the above example, there are two runs: a run of 5 A's, and another of 4 B's.\nThe problem with run-length encoding is that it only works on long pieces of the same value of data. If you receive a package with \"ABBAABAAB\" inside, that can be compressed into \"1A2B2A1B2A1B\"; but that's longer than the original! In this case, there's another method that can be used: checking how often a particular value comes up in the whole data package. This is often called frequency compression.\nThe most common kind of frequency compression is called Huffman coding, after the scientist who came up with the idea. The basic plan is to give each distinct value in a piece of data a code:- values that crop up all the time get shorter codes, and values that only show up once or twice get longer codes.\nLossy compression.\nFor some types of data, lossy compression can go much further; this is most often the case with media files, like music and images. Lossy compression loses some of the data so that there's less to store. Depending on what information is lost, people do not notice it is missing. As a result, it can simply be removed from the data.\nOf course, this will not work for computer programs and other such data where every piece is important; throwing away pieces of a computer program is generally unhealthy for the program. "}
{"id": "3742", "revid": "1119913", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3742", "title": "Compiler", "text": "A compiler is a computer program that translates computer code written in one programming language into another programming language. The first language is called the source language, and the code is called source code. The second language is called the target and can usually be understood by computers. In that case, the instructions become machine code.\nIf a compiler can convert the same instruction text into machine code for different computers (like smartphones or video game machines), it is a 'cross-compiler'. If the compiler can make instruction text that is easier for people to read, it is a 'de-compiler'. People who write these instructions are called programmers. Some even made programs that can translate the instructions that describe how a compiler should work, into a compiler. That kind of program is called a compiler-compiler.\nA compiler usually has three steps. It reads the text and makes notes about how the instructions go together. If the instructions don't make sense, it will try to tell the programmer. Then it will use what it knows about the target language to make the instructions fit better. It then writes down the instructions in the target language. If the source instructions are on different pages, it may have to compile several before it can write everything down.\nCompiling the language.\nA compiler has six parts :\nThe first piece, a lexical analyzer, reads a page of instruction text and splits it into words and sentences. It also marks the type for each word. For example, a word may be number, a variable, a verb, a math sign, or an adjective. The output of a lexical analyzer is a list of tokens.\ncodice_1\ncodice_2\nA parser reads in the output of the lexical analyzer, and verifies the syntax of the language. If the input program is syntactically incorrect or has a type error, it generates errors and warnings. This is called semantic analysis. For example, the parser might complain about the example above, if it \"had not\" already seen codice_3 with its type adjective. The parser uses all the information to make a structure typically called an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).\n`( sentence \n ( write value to unknown\n `( unknown\n `( type, int ),\n `( name, x ) ,\n `( value\n (add\n `( number, 5 ),\n `( seen\n `( type, int ),\n `( name, y ),\n `( value, 0 )\nThe next piece, an optimizer rearranges the tree structure so the target language is optimized. 'Optimized' includes using fewer instructions to perform the same work. This could be important if the final program needs to check a lot of data. (Like seeing how many people, in the whole country, are fifty years old \"and\" buy medicine.) An 'optimized' result might also mean breaking long instructions into smaller ones. Unused and unaccessible code will be removed at this step.\nA programmer usually tries to write instructions in small, related groups. That way, they can keep track of fewer changes in the program. But, that means the code may go on several pages. When a compiler sees that the target program uses several pages to explain the whole recipe, it may use a linker. The linker will put instructions that say where to find the code that's next. Finally, the compiler writes down the instructions in the target language.\nADD 0, 5, spot_1\nLOAD location_y, , spot_2\nADD spot_1, spot_2, spot_3\nSAVE spot_3, , location_x\nProgrammers who write compiler code try to make it as perfect as possible. If the programmer writes incorrect code, the compiler informs of them an error, but if the compiler code itself contains errors, it may be hard to tell where exactly the problem lies.\nVariants.\nAt the end of each compilation step the partial finished product could be stored and then only processed later on. A language like Java uses this successfully, where they lack the final translation step to instructions the processor understands. They only do the final translation step once the Java program is running on a computer. This is either called \"interpreting\" or \"JIT\"ting, depending on the technique used.\nExample.\nFor example, the source code might contain an equation, such as \"x = 5*10 \". The lexical analyzer would separate each number and symbol (such as \"*\" or \"+\") into separate tokens. The parser would note the pattern of tokens, as being an equation. The intermediate-code generator would write a form of coding which defines a storage variable named \"x\" and assigns the numerical product of 5*10 plus 6 and 1. The optimizer would simplify the calculation, of 5*10+6+1, as being just 57. Hence, the target machine-code generator would set a variable named \"x\" and put the value 57 into that storage place in the computer's memory, using the instructions of whichever computer chip is being used."}
{"id": "3743", "revid": "1070632", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3743", "title": "Eye", "text": "The eye is a round organ for sensing light so organisms can see. It is the first part of the visual system. About 97 percent of animals have eyes. Image-resolving eyes are present in cnidaria, molluscs, vertebrates, annelids and arthropods.\nIn mammals, two kinds of cells, \"rods\" and \"cones\", allow sight by sending signals through the optic nerve to the brain.\nSome animals can see light that humans cannot see. They can see ultraviolet or infrared light.\nThe lens on the front part of the eye acts like a camera lens. It can be pulled flatter by muscles inside the eye, or allowed to become rounder. As some people get older, they may not be as able to do this perfectly. Many people are born with other small problems or get them later in life, and they may need eyeglasses (or \"contact lenses\") to fix the problem.\nLike different cameras, different eyes have different abilities. They may have higher or lower resolution, the ability to detect small details. They may have different performance in low light; nocturnal animals can see better at night than daytime animals. They may have different ability to distinguish colours.\nParts of the eye.\nThe human eye is composed of several different parts. These parts may or may not be the same in other animals. They are:\nTypes of eye.\nToday, ten different types of eyes are known. Most ways of capturing an image have evolved at least once.\nOne way to categorize eyes is to look at the number of \"chambers\". \"Simple eyes\" are made of only one concave chamber, perhaps with a lens. Compound eyes have many such chambers with their lenses on a convex surface.\nEyes also can be grouped according to how the photoreceptor is made. Photoreceptors are either cillated, or rhabdomic. and some annelids possess both.\nSimple eyes.\nPit eyes.\nPit eyes are set in a depression in the skin. This reduces the angles at which light can enter. It allows the organism to say where the light is coming from.\nSuch eyes can be found in about 85% of phyla. They probably came before the development of more complex eyes. Pit eyes are small. They are made of up to about hundred cells, covering about 100\u00a0\u00b5m. The directionality can be improved by reducing the size of the opening, and by putting a reflective layer behind the receptor cells.\nPinhole eye.\nThe pinhole eye is an advanced form of pit eye. It has several bits, most notably a small aperture and deep pit. Sometimes, the aperture can be changed. It is only found in the \"Nautilus\". Without a lens to focus the image, it produces a blurry image. Consequently, nautiloids can not discriminate between objects with a separation of less than 11\u00b0. Shrinking the aperture would produce a sharper image, but let in less light.\nSpherical lensed eye.\nThe resolution of pit eyes can be improved a lot by adding a material to make a lens. This will reduce the radius of the blurring, and increase the resolution that can be achieved. The most basic form can still be seen in some gastropods and annelids. These eyes have a lens of one refractive index. It is possible to get a better image with materials that have a high refractive index which decreases towards the edges. This decreases the focal length and allows a sharp image to form on the retina.\nThis eye creates an image that is sharp enough that motion of the eye can cause significant blurring. To minimize the effect of eye motion while the animal moves, most such eyes have stabilizing eye muscles.\nThe ocelli of insects have a simple lens, but their focal point always lies behind the retina.They can never form a sharp image. This limits the function of the eye. Ocelli (pit-type eyes of arthropods) blur the image across the whole retina. They are very good at responding to rapid changes in light intensity across the whole visual field \u2014 this fast response is accelerated even more by the large nerve bundles which rush the information to the brain. Focusing the image would also cause the sun's image to be focused on a few receptors. These could possibly be damaged by the intense light; shielding the receptors would block out some light and reduce their sensitivity.\nThis fast response has led to suggestions that the ocelli of insects are used mainly in flight, because they can be used to detect sudden changes in which way is up (because light, especially UV light which is absorbed by vegetation, usually comes from above).\nRefractive cornea.\nThe eyes of most land-living vertebrates (as well as those of some spiders, and insect larvae) contain a fluid that has a higher refractive index than the air. The cornea is sharply curved and refracts light towards the focus. The lens need not do all of the refracting. This lets the lens adjust the focus more easily, for much higher resolution.\nReflector eyes.\nInstead of using a lens it is also possible to have cells inside the eye that act like mirrors. The image can then be reflected to focus at a central point. This design also means that someone looking into such an eye will see the same image as the organism which has them.\nMany small organisms such as rotifers, copeopods and platyhelminthes use such this design, but their eyes are too small to produce usable images. Some larger organisms, such as scallops, also use reflector eyes. The scallop \"Pecten\" has up to 100 millimeter-scale reflector eyes fringing the edge of its shell. It detects moving objects as they pass successive lenses.\nCompound eyes.\nCompound eyes are different from simple eyes. Instead of having one organ that can sense light, they put together many such organs. Some compound eyes have thousands of them. The resulting image is put together in the brain, based on the signals of the many eye units. Each such unit is called \"ommatidium\", several are called \"ommatidia\". The ommatidia are located on a convex surface, each of them points in a slighly different direction. Unlike simple eyes, compound eyes have a very large angle of view. They can detect fast movement, and sometimes the polarization of light. \nCompound eyes are common in arthropods, annelids, and some bivalved molluscs.\nEvolution of the eye.\nThe evolution of eyes started with simplest light-sensitive patches in unicellular organisms. These eye-spots do nothing but detect if the surroundings are light or dark. Most animals have a biochemical 'clock' inside. These simple eye-spots are used to adjust this daily clock, which is called circadian rhythm. Some snails, for example, see no image (picture) at all, but they sense light, which helps them stay out of bright sunlight.\nMore complex eyes have not lost this function. A special type of cells in the eye senses light for a different purpose than seeing. These cells are called \"ganglion\" cells. They are located in the retina. They send their information about light to the brain along a different path (the \"retinohypothalamic tract\"). This information adjusts (synchronizes) the animal's circadian rhythm to nature's light/dark cycle of 24 hours. The system also works for some blind people who cannot see light at all.\nEyes that are a little bit better are shaped like cups, which lets the animal know where the light is coming from.\nMore complex eyes give the full sense of vision, including color, motion, and texture. These eyes have a round shape that makes light rays focus on the back part of the eye, called the \"retina\".\nOther.\nGood fliers like flies or honey bees, or prey-catching insects like praying mantis or dragonflies, have specialized zones of ommatidia organized into a fovea area which gives sharp vision. In this zone the eyes are flattened and the facets are larger. The flattening allows more ommatidia to receive light from a spot. This gives a higher resolution.\nThe body of \"Ophiocoma wendtii\", a type of brittle star, is covered with ommatidia, turning its whole skin into a compound eye. The same is true of many chitons."}
{"id": "3745", "revid": "253921", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3745", "title": "Tongue-twister", "text": "A tongue-twister is a phrase that is hard to say. They often use alliteration and homophones. They are commonly employed to help warm up singers and actors"}
{"id": "3749", "revid": "1053014", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3749", "title": "AbiWord", "text": "AbiWord is a free word processor that can be downloaded for free, it is open source and is much smaller in size than a proprietary alternative, Microsoft Word. It is available for FreeBSD, Linux, Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, and QNX. Its mascot is Abi the ant. It is much smaller than many other commercial word-processors of its time, only using about 15Mb on a computer's hard drive under Microsoft Windows. "}
{"id": "3750", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3750", "title": "Insect", "text": "Insects are a class in the phylum Arthropoda. They are small terrestrial invertebrates which have a hard exoskeleton.\nInsects are the largest group of animals on Earth by far: about 926,400 different species have been described. They are more than half of all known living species. They may be over 90% of animal species on Earth.\nNew species of insects are continually being found. Estimates of the total number of species range from 2 million to 30 million.\nAll adult insects have six legs; and most have wings. Insects were the first animals capable of flight.\nAs they develop from eggs, insects undergo metamorphosis. Insects live all over the planet: almost all are terrestrial (live on land). Few insects live in the oceans or in very cold places, such as Antarctica. The most species live in tropical areas.\nSome people call all insects \"bugs\", but this is not correct. Only some insects are true bugs, which is a particular order of insects. People who study insects are called entomologists.\nInsect bodies.\nInsects have exoskeletons (skeletons on the outside). Their skeletons are made out of thin, hard pieces or plates, like armour, made of chitin. All together, these pieces make a hard layer around the insect's body. The exoskeleton protects the insect.\nThe body of an insect has three main parts: a head, a thorax, and an abdomen. On the head are an insect's compound eyes, its two antennae (they feel and smell things), and its mouth.\nOn the thorax, insects have wings and legs. All insects have six legs (three pairs of jointed legs) and usually four wings (two pairs).\nThe abdomen is the back part of the insect. Inside the abdomen is the stomach, the heart, and the excretory system where body wastes pass out of the insect. Bees also have a stinger at the back of the abdomen.\nPhysiology.\nJust like our muscles connect to our bones to make us walk and stand up, the muscles of an insect connect to the exoskeleton to make it walk and move. Their muscles are on the \"inside\" of their skeleton.\nInsects are cold-blooded, which means that they cannot control their body temperature. This means that insects are not good at surviving the cold, at any rate out in the open. In the winter, many insects go into something called diapause, which is the insect version of hibernation. Some insects, like cockroaches, cannot go into diapause and they will die if it gets too cold outside. This is why cockroaches love living in people's warm houses.\nRespiratory and circulatory systems.\nInsect respiration happens without lungs. There is a system of internal tubes and sacs through which gases diffuse or are actively pumped. Air is taken in through openings on the sides of the abdomen called spiracles. Oxygen gets to tissues that need it through their trachea (element 8 in diagram).\nMany insect larvae live in water. Many of those have gills that can extract oxygen dissolved in water. Others must rise to the water surface to get air which may be held or trapped in special parts of their body.\nAdult insects use oxygen at a high rate when they fly. They need it for the flight muscles, the most active tissue known in biology. The flight muscles use oxygen at a huge rate: 100 ccs of oxygen for every single cc of tissue per hour. With this system, the greatest diameter a muscle could have (and still consume oxygen at this rate) is about 0.5\u00a0cm. Even with special extra arrangements, insects cannot get larger than about 11\u00a0cm long. The largest insect bodies are about as big as a mouse.\nSome insects also use a molecule called haemocyanin, which does the same job as haemoglobin does in vertebrates (but less efficiently). The insect circulatory system has no veins or arteries. The 'blood' is called haemolymph, and moves around in the space called the haemocoel. The organs sit in the haemocoel and are bathed in the haemolymph. The 'heart' is little more than a single tube which pulses (squeezes).\nHow insects grow.\nInsects start life as an egg. Usually a female (mother) insect lays eggs, but a few species have live birth (the eggs develop inside the mother). The eggs are small; but they can usually be seen with the naked eye.\nAlthough the adults are larger, they do need a magnifying glass or a binocular microscope to see the details. A professional entomologist uses a binocular microscope to identify insects, plus a printed reference work. There are far too many insects for anyone to remember them all, and most entomologists specialise in just one or two orders.\nAfter the eggs hatch, two kinds of development may occur. Some insects have what is called 'incomplete metamorphosis'. This means that a small insect, called a nymph comes out of the egg, and the nymph looks almost the same as the adult insect. As the nymph grows, it does not change the way it looks, but only how big it is. It goes through a number of stages, called 'instars'. Grasshoppers grow in this way.\nOther insects have complete metamorphosis, which means that the small larva which comes out of the egg looks very different from the adult insect. Insects that have complete metamorphosis usually come out of the egg as a larva, which usually looks like a worm. The larva eats food and gets bigger until it turns into a pupa. Butterfly pupae (plural for pupa) are often inside cocoons. Inside the cocoon the insect changes the way it looks and often grows wings. When the cocoon opens, the adult insect comes out. Many insects have complete metamorphosis, for example beetles, butterflies and moths, and flies. The adult stage of development is called the imago.\nEvolutionary history.\nOrigin of insects.\nThe oldest known insect fossil is the Devonian \"Rhyniognatha\", from the 396 million year old Rhynie chert. It may have superficially resembled a modern-day silverfish insect. This species already possessed mandibles of a type associated with winged insects, suggesting that wings may already have evolved at this time. Thus, anatomical recrds suggest the first insects may have appeared earlier, in the Silurian period. Genomic analysis puts their origin even further back in the Ordovician period.\nOrigin of wings.\nIn 2008, researchers uncovered what they believe is the world's oldest known full-body impression of a primitive flying insect, a 300 million-year-old specimen from the Carboniferous period.\nThe origin of insect flight is unclear, since the earliest known winged insects appear to have been capable fliers. Some extinct insects had an additional pair of winglets attaching to the first segment of the thorax, for a total of three pairs. It seems the insects were not a particularly successful group of animals before they evolved wings.\nUpper Carboniferous and Lower Permian insect orders include both living groups and a number of Palaeozoic groups, now extinct. During this era, some giant dragonfly-like forms reached wingspans of making them far larger than any living insect.\nThis gigantism may have been due to higher atmospheric oxygen levels, which allowed increased respiratory efficiency. The lack of flying vertebrates could have been another factor. Many of the early groups became extinct during the PermianTriassic extinction event, the largest mass extinction in the history of the Earth, around 252 million years ago.\nKinds of insects.\nDifferent kinds of insects are put into groups called orders. There are about 29 insect orders. The biggest insect orders are listed below:\nAll these groups except one (Odonata) are strongly connected with plants as a source of food.\nSpiders, scorpions, and similar animals are not insects; they are arachnids. Arachnids are arthropods that have four pairs of legs. Centipedes are also arthropods, but not insects: they are in a subphylum called the Myriapoda.\nTaxonomy.\nThis taxonomy lists some of the better known groups of insects.\nInsects and people.\nSome insects can be pests to people in different ways. Some are parasites, such as lice and bed bugs. Some of these parasite insects spread diseases, for example mosquitoes spread malaria.\nMany insects eat agricultural products (plants meant for people to eat). Locustss are an example of pest insects that eat plants in agriculture.\nSome insects are used by us. Bees make honey. The larvae of some moths make silk, which people use to make clothing. In some parts of the world, people actually eat insects. Eating insects for food is called entomophagy.\nMany bees and flies pollinate plants. This means the insects help the plants make seeds by moving pollen from one flower to another. Some good insects eat pest insects, such as lady beetles (or ladybirds or ladybugs) eating aphids. Many insects eat dead plants and animals.\nPesticides.\nPeople often use poisons called insecticides to kill pest insects. Insecticides do not always work. Sometimes the pest insects become resistant to the insecticides, which means the insecticides do not hurt them anymore. Both the Colorado potato beetle and the diamondback moth are insects that are resistant to many insecticides.\nInsecticides do not only kill pest insects; sometimes many helpful insects are killed too. When helpful insects are killed, such as those that eat pest insects, the pest insects may come back in larger numbers than before because they are not being eaten by helpful insects anymore."}
{"id": "3752", "revid": "332472", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3752", "title": "List of operating systems", "text": "This is a list of operating systems.\nHobby OS.\nOperating systems written for a hobby.\nProprietary.\nMicrocontroller, embedded.\nLittle operating systems that run on small devices.\nFictional operating systems.\nOperating systems that have only appeared in fiction or as jokes."}
{"id": "3755", "revid": "6504705", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3755", "title": "Computer jargon", "text": "Computer jargon means words to do with computers and surrounding topics. Knowing what these words mean can help people know more about computers. Most people use these words to discuss computer ideas, but some people use these words to impress others (also known as buzzwords).\nSome examples of jargon are:"}
{"id": "3756", "revid": "687039", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3756", "title": "Million", "text": "One million (1,000,000), or one thousand thousand, is the natural number after 999,999 and before 1,000,001. The name is derived from Italian, where was 1,000, and 1,000,000 became a \"milione\", as 'a large thousand'.\nIn scientific notation, the number is written as 1\u00d7106 or just 106. Physical quantities can also be expressed using the SI prefix when dealing with SI units. For example, 1 megawatt equals 1,000,000 watts.\nThe word 'million' is common to both the short-scale and long-scale numbering systems, unlike the larger numbers, which have different names in the two systems.\nThe million is sometimes used in the English language as a metaphor for a very large number, as in 'Never in a million years' and 'You're one in a million', or as hyperbole, as in 'I've walked a million miles'.\n\"Il Milione\" is the title of Marco Polo's narration of his travels in China. The name is supposed to come from Polo's nickname after his tales of riches and multitudes."}
{"id": "3757", "revid": "73230", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3757", "title": "1000 (number)", "text": "A thousand (1000, one thousand or 1,000) is the natural number after 999 and before 1001. One thousand thousands is known as a million.\nIn Roman numerals, 1000 is written as M."}
{"id": "3759", "revid": "756599", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3759", "title": "Gross domestic product", "text": "In economics, gross domestic product (GDP) is how much a place produces in an amount of time. GDP can be calculated by adding up its output inside the borders of that country. \nTo find the GDP of a country, one adds up all consumer spending (C), all investment (I), all government spending minus taxes (G), and the value of exports minus imports (\"X \u2013 M\"). This is shown by the equation:formula_1 This measure is often used to find out how healthy a country is; a country with a high value of GDP can be called a large economy. The United States has the largest GDP in the world. Germany has the largest in Europe, Nigeria in Africa and China in Asia.\nThere are different ways to calculate the GDP. Nominal GDP is the total amount of money spent on all new and final goods in an economy, real GDP (adjusting for changes in prices) tries to correct this number for inflation. For example, if the prices rise by 2% (meaning, everything costs 2% more) and the nominal GDP grows by 5%, the real GDP growth is only increased by 3%. \nGDP per capita is the total income of a country, divided by the number of inhabitants. It shows how rich people, on average, are.\nGross national product.\nThe GDP measure is different from gross national product (GNP) in that GNP = GDP + net income from assets in other countries (net income receipts).\nNominal GDP.\nWhen the gross domestic product is evaluated at the current market prices, it is called the nominal GDP. It includes changes in prices which makes it different from the real GDP. These changes can be due to inflation or price fluctuations. It can be measured in one of three different ways. The \"income approach\" uses the total of all income from businesses and individuals in a single year. The \"expenditure approach\" uses the market value of all goods purchased in a single year. The \"production approach\" is based on the total production in a single year."}
{"id": "3760", "revid": "1110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3760", "title": "GDP", "text": ""}
{"id": "3762", "revid": "487619", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3762", "title": "Cricket", "text": "Cricket is a sport which is played between two teams of eleven players each. One team, which is batting, tries to score runs, while the other team is fielding, and tries to prevent this. Runs are scored by hitting the ball, which is thrown by a player from the fielding team to a player from the batting team, across the boundary, or by the two batting players running back-and-forth between the two wickets. \nThe wickets are sets of three small, wooden posts that are at each end of a rectangle of short grass called 'the pitch', which is 22 yards long. The pitch is inside a much larger oval of grass called the 'area of play'. The area of play is a 30 yard circle inside the cricket ground or stadium. The fielding team can attempt to get batting players \"out\" in a number of ways. When a player is out, a teammate will replace them in the field. When a team no longer has two \"not-out\" players left to score, then the other team gets the chance to try to score. In shorter games of cricket, a team may also have to stop batting when the ball has been thrown to their players a certain number of times. After both teams have had enough chances to score, the team with the most runs wins.\nThe game started to gain popularity in England in the 16th century. The earliest definite reference to the sport is in a court case of 1598. The Guildford court heard John Derrick, a coroner, that fifty years earlier, \"he and diverse of his fellows did run and play [on the common land] at cricket\". Later, the game spread to countries of the British Empire in the 19th and 20th centuries.\nToday, it is a popular sport in England, Australia, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, South Africa, New Zealand, the West Indies and several other countries such as Afghanistan, Ireland, Kenya, Scotland, the Netherlands, and Zimbabwe.\nCricket rules.\nThere are two teams: The team bowling has 11 players on the field. The team batting has two players, one at each end of the pitch (also sometimes called the wicket).\nThe captain of the bowling team chooses a bowler from his team; the other players are called 'fielders'. \nThe bowler runs towards his wicket, and bowls towards the batsman at the other wicket. \nThe batsman is trying to defend the wicket from getting hit with the ball. He does this with a bat. When he hits the ball with his bat, he may run toward the other wicket. \nThere are different ways that a batsman can get out. The most common ways are:\nWhen a batsman is out, another comes onto the field to take his place. The innings is over when ten wickets are taken (i.e. ten of the eleven batsmen are out). After this, the team which was the 'fielding' team becomes the 'batting' team. They now have to score more runs than the other team managed to score. If they score more runs before ten wickets are taken, they win. If they do not, the other team wins.\nIn a one-day game, each side has one innings, and innings are limited to a certain number of overs. In longer formats each side has two innings, and there is no specific limit to the number of overs in an innings.\nWhere cricket is played.\nCricket is popular in many countries, mostly in Commonwealth countries.\nThe countries where cricket is most popular compete in international matches (games between countries) that last up to 5 days, which are called Test matches. Those countries are England, Australia, West Indies, South Africa, New Zealand, India, Bangladesh, Zimbabwe, Ireland, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka. The West Indies are a group of Caribbean countries that play together as a team. Several other countries have more junior status. The test match idea was invented by teams from England and Australia in the 19th century.Ireland and Afghanistan are the new teams which can play Test cricket.\nCricket is also played in Kenya, Canada, Bermuda, Scotland, Holland and Namibia; the national teams of those countries can play one-day international matches, but do not play test matches.\nThe field.\nA cricket field is where cricket is played. It is circular or oval-shaped grassy ground. There are no fixed dimensions for the field. Its diameter usually varies between 450\u00a0feet (137\u00a0m) to 500\u00a0feet (100\u00a0m).\nDifferent forms of cricket.\nTest matches.\nTest matches are the top international matches played between countries. The main point of test cricket is to test young players. The countries permitted to play test matches are accredited by the ICC: the International Cricket Council. The ten countries are listed below, with 'West Indies',' England' counting for this purpose as a country. Tests last for up to five days (This is why many also call it \"5 day cricket.\") and can still end in a draw match : it is the longest format of cricket. \nTest Playing Nations \"in order of first dates\": \nNational league systems.\nCalled counties in England, and states in Australia and islands in the West Indies. These are three or four day matches.\nLimited overs cricket.\nIn these games, the length is determined by the number of overs, and each side has one innings only. A special formula, known as the 'Duckworth\u2013Lewis method' is applied if rain reduces the time for play. It calculates the target score for the team batting second in a limited overs match interrupted by weather or other circumstance.\nOne day internationals (ODI50).\nODIs are usually restricted to 50 overs batting for each side and each bowler can bowl up to 10 overs maximum. The highest team score is England 481-6 against Australia in June 19, 2018. The highest individual score is 264 off 173 balls by Rohit Sharma for India against Sri Lanka.\nTwenty20 cricket (T20 Cricket).\nTwenty20 cricket has 20 overs for each side and each bowler can bowl up to 4 overs maximum unlike 10 overs in an ODI match. The highest team score is 263/5 by Royal Challengers Bangalore (RCB) against Pune Warriors India (PWI) in the 2013 IPL season. The highest individual score is 175* off 69 balls by Chris Gayle for RCB in the same match.\nAverages.\nIn cricket there are two special kinds of average, used to measure how good a player is:\nThere is a separate set of averages for each type of cricket listed above."}
{"id": "3763", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3763", "title": "Track and field athletics", "text": "Track and field is part of the sport of athletics. Athletics is a collection of sport events that includes running, jumping and \"throwing\". Track and field events take place in a sports stadium, either on the running track, or on the field inside the running track. These tracks are generally made up of synthetic rubber \u2013 rubber particles bound with latex or polyurethane. Other athletics events that are not track and field, include cross country running, road running, marathon running, and race-walking - these events take place outside a sports stadium.\nAthletics is a very common sporting event over the world. Athletics is a combination of different sports, generally running, jumping and throwing events. Running events include marathons, hurdle races, long distance and short distance events. Some jumping events are high jump, long jump, triple jump and pole vault. Throwing events involve javelin throw, discus throw, hammer throw and shot put.\nThere are also events that combine parts of running, jumping, and throwing. One of these is the \"decathlon\", which includes two short-distance races, a mile run, a hurdles race, javelin, discus, shot-put, high jump and pole vault.\nAll participants are timed or have a distance measured and this is their end result. Participants train hard for an event and always aim to better their results.\nAthletics is a sport that people take part in all over the world. It is a sport that is most common between young children up to younger adults. Athletics can be played for enjoyment, but it can also be a competitive sport. Athletics is also an event in the Olympic games."}
{"id": "3765", "revid": "7837066", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3765", "title": "Badminton", "text": "Badminton is a sport for two or four( \"singles\" or \"doubles\") people. The game is either one player against one player or a team of two players against another team of two players. Players use rackets to hit a shuttlecock over a net but if it goes too far it will be an out.\nThe aim of the game is to hit the shuttlecock over the net in a way that the other player or pair cannot hit it back properly before it hits the floor. Every time this is done, the player or pair gets one point. They also get to serve. The first player or pair to reach 21 points wins a game. \nThe winner of the match is the first to win 2 sets. \nHistory.\nBadminton traces its history to a game called George Cajoles, which was played in Pune, India in the 19th century by the British military officers stationed there. This game was taken by retired officers back to England where it developed and quickly grew in popularity. \nIn 1877, the first set of written rules were arranged by the newly formed Bath Badminton Club. The All England Open Badminton Championships, the first badminton competition in the world, was held in 1899.\nBadminton has been an Olympic sport since 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona.\nAlthough badminton originated in England, it is mainly played in countries of Asia such as China, Nepal, Indonesia, India, and the Republic of Korea that now dominates this sport.\nThe first Indian to win the All England Badminton Championship was Prakash Padukone in the year 1980"}
{"id": "3768", "revid": "3", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3768", "title": "Computer Science", "text": ""}
{"id": "3770", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3770", "title": "Chemical warfare", "text": "Chemical warfare means using chemical compounds in war to injure or kill people. The chemicals used for chemical warfare are poisonous. \nChemical warfare has been used since the Stone Age. Since 1899, several international laws have said that using chemical weapons is illegal. But chemical weapons have still been used in wars since then.\nDefinition.\nChemical weapons are different than regular weapons (like bombs) or nuclear weapons because they do not explode. Some chemical weapons are meant to kill people; they do this by poisoning them. Other chemical weapons are meant to \"incapacitate\" people (make them unable to fight back). They do this by causing pain, injuries, or sickness.\nChemical warfare does not include using living organisms (like anthrax bacteria) to make people sick. That is called biological warfare. \nHowever, some living organisms make toxins (poisons). These toxins are not alive. For example, botulinum toxin is made by a bacteria, and ricin is made by the castor oil plant. Because botulinum toxin and ricin are not alive, using them to make people sick is called chemical warfare. This is explained in the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The Convention also says that any toxic chemical is a chemical weapon unless it is used for legal reasons.\nAbout 70 different chemicals have been used or stockpiled (saved up) as chemical warfare agents during the 20th century. The Chemical Weapons Convention says that all of these chemicals should be destroyed.\nThe Chemical Weapons Convention lists three different groups of chemicals. These are chemicals that are poisonous enough to be used as chemical weapons, or chemicals that may be used to make chemical weapons.\nHistory.\nAlthough very basic chemical warfare has been used in many parts of the world for thousands of years, \"modern\" chemical warfare began during World War I (see the page Chemical weapons in World War I).\nSince modern chemical warfare started in World War I, countries have tried to research and make chemical weapons. They have had four main goals:\nAncient history.\nChemical warfare was first used during the Stone Age. Stone Age people used poisoned arrows and spear-tips. These were dipped in poisons, like venom from snakes or scorpions. Sometimes they used poisonous plants. \nThe Ancient Chinese used different forms of poisonous smokes, when they besieged a city to try to take it over.\nThe Ancient Greeks used a form of burning wood, pitch from plants, and sulphur.\nWorld War I.\n\"Main article: Chemical weapons in World War I\"\nPoison gas was first used in World War I. France was the first country to make this type of gas. However, Germany was the first to use it in battle, on March 15th, 1915. On that day, they used tear gas against France.\nThe three types of gas used in World War One were:\nAt first, very basic ways of spreading these gases were used. Even so, many soldiers could be hurt or killed. This was partly because World War I was fought usingtrench warfare, so many soldiers would be in the same place at the same time, and escaping from poisonous gases would be very hard.\nGermany was the first country in World War I to use chemical warfare in battle. They simply opened containers of chlorine upwind of enemy soldiers, so that the wind would carry the chlorine gas to their enemies. \nSoon after this, the French started using chemical weapons too. They filled artillery projectiles with phosgene and fired them at the Germans. This was a much more effective way of using chemical weapons. It would become the most common way of delivering chemical weapons during World War I.\nModern use.\nChemical weapons were not used very much in World War II, except by the Japanese army during the invasion of China. This was because everybody was afraid that the other side would use weapons like theirs. Also, chemical weapons were not easy to use. They took time to use, and this made it harder for soldiers to move quickly. Also, the raw materials needed to make chemical weapons were not easy to get. This was because World War II was fought in areas which were not connected well by railroads.\nDuring the Iran-Iraq War, Iraq used chemical weapons (Iran did not). Many people believe that Iraq used chemical weapons against the Kurdish people.\nThe United States has used chemical weapons even after World War II. For example, the U.S. used Agent Orange during the Vietnam War.\nIt has been reported that many other countries, like the People's Republic of China, Cuba, Egypt, Iran, Israel, North Korea, Pakistan, Sudan, Syria, Taiwan, and Serbia and Montenegro, have chemical weapons.\nLaws about chemical weapons.\nAccording to international law, it is wrong to use chemical weapons. Since 1899, there have been many rules that make it illegal to make, import, and use chemical weapons. \nThe first international law to make chemical warfare illegal was the Hague Convention in 1899. \nAfter World War I, the Geneva Protocol of 1925 made it illegal to use chemical or biological weapons on people.\nIn 1997, the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) was created. As of the end of 2015, 192 countries had agreed to follow the CWC. According to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, as of October 2015, 90% of the world's chemical weapons stockpiles had been destroyed.\nChemical agents.\nThe main types of agents used in chemical warfare are:\nIf we use chemicals (like Agent Orange or glyphosate) to destroy plants, sometimes human beings may be affected by side effects. But, we will not call it chemical warfare. Chemical warfare covers only direct attacks on human life."}
{"id": "3772", "revid": "7860767", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3772", "title": "Iran", "text": "Iran officially the Islamic Republic of Iran (), historically known as Persia, is a country in Western Asia. It is part of the Middle East region. It shares borders with Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iraq, Pakistan, Turkey, and Turkmenistan.\nTehran is the capital and biggest city. Iran is the eighteenth largest country in the world. It has more than 84.9 million people. Iran has been a member of the United Nations since 1945. It is a member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). It is an Islamic republic.\nIn Iran, Persians, Azerbaijanis, Kurds, Mazandaranis, Gilaks, Lurs and Bakhtiaris make up the nations minority ethnic groups.\nHistory.\nIn the past, Iran was called \"Persia\" by people outside of the country. The people that lived there called the country \"Iran\". The official name was Persia, a region in Iran. The name Persia was used when dealing with other countries and in government papers.\nIn 1935, Reza Sh\u0101h Pahlavi was Shah of Iran. He officially asked foreigners to call the country \"Iran\". This was done to show that Iran belongs to all the non-Persian Iranians as well as to Persian Iranians. The name Iran means \"land of the Aryans\". It is used in the ancient book of the Zoroastrians, the Avesta. In the 19th and early 20th century, the name \"Aryan\" was used by Europeans to mean \"all Indo-Europeans\". The \"Aryan Race\" was a term that Hitler used to describe his \"Superior\" or \"perfect\" race, but it first meant Iranians. \"Aryan\" means \"noble\" in Iranian languages.\nPersian Empire.\nAround 500 BC, the area that is now Iran was the center of the Achaemenid Empire. The Greek city states fought against the Persian armies led by Darius the Great and Xerxes. Then Alexander the Great took the country by fighting the Achaemenid dynasty of Persia. He ruled until he died,then the Greek Seleucids ruled until they were defeated by the Parthian Empire which later fought the Roman Empire.\nAfter the Parthians, the Sassanian dynasty (224-651) took over. Other people took Persia by fi\\ghting, like the Arabs (7th century), Turks (10th century) and Mongols (13th century). However, Iran has always had a different culture and continued to survive.\nAfter the Arab Muslims conquered the Iranians, Persian women were enslaved as domestic servants while Persian men were forced to build and farm and engage hard labour. The Arab Abbasid Harun caliph had Persian concubines like Marajil al-Badghisiyya whom the later Abbasid caliph Al-Ma'mun descended from in the maternal line. \nAfter World War II.\nThe Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) worked in Iran to create 1953 riots which led to the removal of Prime Minister Mosaddegh. The United States and Great Britain then made the Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi the most powerful person in Iran, again. The Shah left Iran in 1979 in the face of a revolt. The Iranian government was changed to an Islamic Republic by Islamic Revolution. Soon afterwards, the Iranian Students Movement (Tahkim Vahdat), with the backing of the new government, took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. They held most of the diplomats hostage for 444 days.\nRelations between the two countries have not been good since. For example, the United States claims that Iran supports terrorist groups against Israel. Iran does not see Israel as a country. Iran, along with most Arab countries, believes that Israel does not have the right to exist. However, Iran has collaborated with the West at times. These deals have been about energy or about fighting terrorism.\nIran fought the Iran\u2013Iraq War in the 1980s. Many foreign countries supported Iraq.\nNow, the West is trying to prevent Iran from using nuclear technology, even though Iran is a member of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has reported many times that there is no evidence that Iran is developing nuclear weapons. However, it also says that it can not say for sure that Iran is not doing so in secret.\nA December 2007 CIA report on nuclear activity in Iran said that Iran's secret program to get nuclear weapons technology was stopped in 2003. It said that Iran will probably not be able to build a nuclear weapon soon. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a political strategy to deal with this issue.\nEconomy.\nIran has the natural resource of oil. It is a member of OPEC. Oil is one of its main exports. Rice, handicrafts, carpets and crocus are important local products. Iran is the world's largest exporter and producer of caviar. Iran is also one of the world's biggest exporters of pistachio nuts.\nIran has factories that produce industrial products. Iran is also involved in the field of biomedical sciences.\nRial is the money used in Iran.\nReligion in Iran.\nAbout 90% of Iranian people are Muslim. The state religion is Shia Islam. It has been the state religion since the Safavid dynasty in the 16th century. This is the religion of about 75% of Iranians. They belong to the Twelver branch. About 9% of Iranians Muslim belong to the Sunni branch of Islam. The 9% of Iranians who are not Muslim are Bah\u00e1'\u00eds, Mandeans, Zoroastrians, Christians and Jews. It is thought that there are between 300,000 and 350,000 Persian (Iranian) Jews."}
{"id": "3773", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3773", "title": "Gautama Buddha", "text": "The Buddha is a title used to refer to a man named \"Siddharth Gautama\". It means Fully Awakened One. He was born in a region of what is now known as the country Nepal as Prince Siddhartha Gautam in a Nepali Shakya Kingdom in Lumbini, Nepal and was the person who created the religion of Buddhism. He lived from about 563\u00a0BC to about 483\u00a0BC. \nHe is also called Shakyamuni Buddha because he was a\nmember of the \u015a\u0101kyan clan, the ruling class of an aristocratic republic in Lumbini in Nepal in that region.\nEarly years.\nAbout 2600 years ago, a clan called the \"Shakyas\" in Lumbini, Nepal ruled the city of Kapilavastu.\nSiddhartha Gautama was born just outside the city in Lumbini, Nepal as Prince Siddhartha Gautam in a Nepali Shakya clan. His father was a ruler named Shuddhodana, and his mother was named Maya. Maya died when Siddhartha was about 7 days old. His father controlled him in a very peaceful and nice way. There were home tutors for him as he was not interested in the outward things that took place at that time. Siddhartha lived in luxury; his father kept trouble and hard work far from him. A seer predicted that if Siddhartha stayed inside his palace his whole life, then he would become a great king. However, if he left the palace, then he would become a great religious leader. The king did not want his son to become a religious leader. He kept Siddhartha in the palace for his entire childhood.\nWhen Siddhartha turned 16 years old, his father found a woman for him to marry. He married a woman named Yashodhara, and they had a son named Rahula. Although Siddhartha had everything he could want, he was still not happy. He wanted to learn about life outside his palace.\nLegend says that he got out of the castle against his father's orders. He saw the \"Four Great Sights\": an old man, a sick man, a dead man, and a holy man with no home. \nSiddhartha left his family, his land and everything else in Nepal at the age of 29. He left everything to travel to neighbouring country India to be a mendicant (a wandering ascetic); eventually he became a religious leader for the people.\nSeeking.\nMany holy men at this time were \"ascetics\". They hurt their bodies for religious reasons. They abstain from certain pleasures so they can get rid of desire. One group of ascetics were called the Jains. They practiced self-denial and made themselves suffer very much. They believed this would free the \u0101tman (soul) from pain and sadness. There were many types of ascetic mendicants (wanderers) throughout the region which would become known as India. \nSiddhartha tried these ascetic practices and meditation techniques, and eventually became better than his teachers. He still found no answer, so he left his teachers and friends to discover another way. He decided to eat only six grains of rice a day. He tried holding his breath. His body became very thin, like skin and bones, and he nearly died. Still, he had no answer.\nSiddhartha began to think again about this path. He recalled sitting under a roseapple tree as a boy, and reaching a profound happy peaceful state. He thought this memory might point to a better way than hurting himself. He accepted a meal of milk-rice so he would have strength to make focussed effort. He found a fig tree (now called the \"Bodhi tree\") and decided to meditate beneath it. He promised himself that he would not leave this spot until he had found \"enlightenment\". He meditated under the tree (some say for 49 days). His mind is said to have become pure, and then--after a total of six years practicing--he became enlightened. He was now the Buddha the Fully Awakened\nHis life as a Buddha.\nWhen the Buddha became \"enlightened\", he found the answer to \"suffering\", and he knew how to defeat \"suffering\". This answer was called the Four Noble Truths. He was not sure if he should teach his new ideas or not. He asked himself if the world was ready for such a deep teaching. But in the end, he decided to travel to a town called Sarnath to teach the people his new way. He taught about the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path. The people listened to him.\nWhen he taught, he did not pretend to be a god. He said he was just a man who had found the meaning of life (enlightenment), and that any person can also find the meaning of life. For the rest of his life, he walked all over Southern Nepal and parts of India to teach people what he believed. He started a \"Sangha\", which is a group of Buddhist monks and nuns. Many people became enlightened because of him. At the age of 80, after 45 years teaching the Four Noble Truths, Gautama Buddha died.\nThe life teachings.\nThe teachings of the Buddha are known as \"Buddhism\". Buddhism is mostly about ending the feeling of pain that all people feel inside. Gautama Buddha taught that old age, sickness, death and suffering is a part of everyone's life. He taught that pain is caused by craving. And he showed that there is a way to end craving and end suffering by doing good things, not doing bad things, and training one's mind. When a person is able to perfect these qualities, they will gain \"enlightenment\".\nBuddhism teaches non-harm and balance \u2013 not going too far one way or the other. The Buddha taught people to meditate while sitting in the lotus position or when standing, sitting, walking, or lying down. The Buddha urged his followers to remember the Teachings, and ask questions. Some Buddhists chant (which was a way to remember and preserve the Teachings). Buddhists sometimes do these things to understand the human heart and mind. Sometimes they do these things to understand the way the world works. Sometimes they do these things to find peace.\nThe Buddha taught that people should not look to gods to save them or bring them enlightenment. The gods may have power over world events and they might help people, or they might not. But Buddha believed that it is up to each person to become enlightened."}
{"id": "3775", "revid": "330", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3775", "title": "Siddhartha Gautama", "text": ""}
{"id": "3777", "revid": "7019768", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3777", "title": "North", "text": "North is one of the 4 main directions on a compass. North is usually up on most maps. For Example: The United States is north of the Mexico, which is itself north of Brazil. The North Pole is the farthest north you can go. The North of the world is considered to be the top. "}
{"id": "3779", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3779", "title": "List of Portuguese football teams", "text": "These are some Portuguese football teams."}
{"id": "3787", "revid": "223446", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3787", "title": "Epiphany (software)", "text": "Epiphany is a Web browser for GNOME. It is also available for Mac OS X and was made from Galeon.\nIt uses the Gecko layout engine from the Mozilla project to show web pages; however, the Epiphany developers have a new but less stable version of Epiphany 2.21.4 using the WebKit engine instead of Gecko. The Epiphany team wants to stop using Gecko and only use the WebKit engine, by the time they release Epiphany 2.24 or 2.26. Epiphany has tabbed browsing, cookie management, popup blocking and an extensions system. Epiphany can be extended with the Epiphany-extensions package in GNU/Linux Operating Systems.\nEpiphany was made from Galeon by Marco Pesenti Gritti (also the creator of Galeon) with the aim of making a web browser with a very simple user experience. Because of that, Epiphany does not have its own themes, instead, it uses GNOME\u2019s settings that are set in the GNOME Control Center."}
{"id": "3788", "revid": "212981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3788", "title": "Video game console", "text": "A video game console is a machine that is used to play video games. Video game consoles usually connect to a television. \nSpecial controllers are attached to the console to control the game. Some video game consoles are handheld. They can be carried around and have their own screens. The Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable are examples of handheld consoles. Some video game consoles can also run general software, such as Linux."}
{"id": "3789", "revid": "1102992", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3789", "title": "PlayStation", "text": "The PlayStation (often known as the PS1 or the PSX) is a video game console made by Sony released in December 1994. At the time, it was competing against the Nintendo 64 and the Sega Saturn. PlayStation games were stored on CDs. The controllers that were first released with the console had no analog joysticks on them, but analog joysticks and a vibration feature were added to later controllers. A slimmer version of the console called the PSOne was released in 2000. It was white instead of grey. It was succeeded by the PlayStation 2 in March 2000 and was discontinued on March 23, 2006 (eight months before the PlayStation 3 was released).\nSales.\nThe PlayStation and the PSOne have sold over 120 million consoles.\nPeripherals.\nPocketStation.\nThe PocketStation was a very small games console released as a peripheral (an extra accessory) for the PlayStation. It had a clock, an LCD display and four buttons. It could be used as a memory card. It wasn't released in the United States, because it did not sell well."}
{"id": "3790", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3790", "title": "Election", "text": "An election is a way people can choose their candidate or their preferences in a representative democracy or other form of government. \nMost democratic countries hold new elections for their national legislature every few years. What elections do is select representatives for the local areas. These are called MPs (Members of Parliament) in the British parliamentary system. Parliamentary systems may have a head of government and a head of state, but sometimes the two posts are held by the same person.\nThe legislature chooses the government, usually by majority vote in the legislature. Some democracies elect a president, who then selects the government. Many democratic countries also have regional, provincial or state elections.\nThere are different ways to organize an election in different countries. Voters might vote for an individual, or they might vote for a political party (party list). This is because different countries use different voting systems. \nAs a foundation of democracy, voting in elections has been adopted in most countries around the world. Whilst the process of electing an individual as a representative in a government can be simple, many election candidates spend mass amounts of money on their campaigns. The past decade has seen a consistent trend of politicians and election candidate spending more and more on their campaigns. Higher household incomes, inflation and population growth are all factors that have contributed to this trend of higher election spend.\nEvery country around the world has different rules and regulations when it come sot voting in elections. The biggest differences amongst most major countries is, the age in which an individual may vote and whether voting in an election is compulsory or not. Argentina, Brazil and Austria are among the few countries where the legal voting age is 16. \nCountries that are not democracies can also hold elections. This is usually done to let the people choose a local representative (like a mayor). Also many countries call themselves democracies, but behind the scenes have a more autocratic form of government.\nVatican City is a theocracy: The pope (and a few high-ranking clerics) run the state. When the pope dies, or steps down, a number of high-ranking priests (called cardinals) select a new pope, through an election. When they are done, they will announce the result in a speech, called Habemus Papam (Latin: We have a pope)\nElections keep a democratic country functioning, as they give people the right to select their own government. However, there are ways a government can \"fix\" elections. Opposition candidates are permitted in former USSR countries, but they are usually prevented from using broadcasting or the newspapers. This means that, in effect, the ruling president is never challenged. Elections which are fixed are sometimes called sham elections or show elections.\nCountries where the candidates are elected with a very high approval rating usually use elections to hide a more autocratic form of government. When Saddam Hussein was elected president of Iraq in 1995, he got 99.96% approval. There were about 8.4 million valid votes, 3,052 people voted against him. 99.47% of all people allowed to vote did so (this is called voting turnout). Another example: Kim Jong-un was elected the leader of North Korea, in 2014, with 100% of the vote.\nPsephology is the study of elections."}
{"id": "3793", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3793", "title": "Medicine", "text": "Medicine is the science that deals with diseases (illnesses) in humans and animals, the best ways to prevent diseases, and the best ways to return to a healthy condition.\nPeople who practice \"medicine\" are most often called medical doctors or physicians. Often doctors work closely with nurses and many other types of health care professionals.\nMany doctors specialize in one kind of medical work. For example, pediatrics is the medical specialty about the health of children.\nSpecialties in Medicine.\nAnaesthesiology.\nIn this specialty, the doctor is trained to provide anaesthesia and sedation. This is important for surgeries and certain medical procedures. Anaesthesiologists also provide pre-operative assessments, ensuring the patient is safe during the operation and successfully awakens from anaesthesia after the operation. They assess for medical conditions and suitability for anaesthesia. They screen for risk factors prior to surgery and try to optimize the operative environment for the patient and the surgeon. They are the doctors who give epidurals during labor and delivery, provide spinal blocks, local nerve blocks, and general anaesthesia for procedures. They are the doctors who are especially trained in intubation (putting a tube into the lungs to help a person artificially breathe when the person is paralyzed and asleep during surgery). Hence, due to their skill in intubation, they are often the first line responders for emergencies. They help people who are in distress with their breathing, who have lost their airway or when their airway has become obstructed.\nCardiology.\nA cardiologist is a doctor with special training on the heart. The doctor in this field ensures the heart is healthy and functions properly. The heart is a vital organ whose role is to pump blood to the rest of the body. The purpose of blood is to deliver oxygen to the tissues. Without the heart functioning well, our tissues and organs would die and not function properly. Cardiologists treat heart attacks, sudden cardiac arrests, arrhythmias (rhythm issues related to a faulty electrical system of the heart), heart failure (where the heart fails to pump blood forward properly) and many other heart related illnesses. They specialize in life saving procedures like cardiac stents and cardiac ablation. There is a subspecialty within cardiology called \"Interventional cardiology.\" These are cardiologists who specialize in interventions or procedures to save the function of the heart, such as cardiac stenting or angiography.\nCardiovascular surgery.\nThis specialty consists of well trained doctors who practice cardiac surgery. They are best known for their role in cardiac bypass surgeries. In cardiac bypass, the surgeon restores blood flow to the area of the heart that was deficient due to a blocked coronary artery. This is usually done by taking a vein, most commonly the saphenous vein from the leg, to create a pathway of blood flow to the heart region that needs it.\nEmergency medicine.\nEmergency room doctors are in charge of sudden important or life-threatening emergencies. In addition to dealing with heart attacks, strokes, traumas, issues that require immediate medical attention or surgeries, they also deal with a wide range of other health conditions, such as mental health and drug overdoses. Their training is broad and diverse as anyone can walk through the door seeking help. They see patients of all ages and walks of life. However, unlike a general practitioner or family doctor, their immediate goal is to make sure the patient is stable and exclude any serious or life-threatening diseases or conditions.\nFamily medicine.\nA family doctor, otherwise known as general practitioner, is trained to provide medical service to people of all ages, demographics, and walks of life. Their training is diverse to deal with a variety of conditions including all non surgical specialties. They also follow the patient from birth to death and are trained to treat an individual as a whole, in the context of their social setting and also their family situation and mental health. Unlike specialists who mainly deal with problems of one organ or system, family doctors deal with all parts of the body and synthesize this information for the patient's general health. They provide a global perspective of the person's health in the patient's unique life situation. They are an individual's regular doctor who knows the patient in their social and family context. They can refer to specialists for issues that require more detailed or specialized treatments unavailable to them as an outpatient or beyond their expertise.\nGastroenterology.\nGastroenterologists are doctors who specialize in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and upper abdominal organs. The GI tract is consists of the esophagus all the way down to the anus. The upper abdominal organs include the liver, gallbladder, pancreas and spleen. In addition to dealing with medical conditions associated with these organs, doctors in this speciality also perform endoscopies. This is where a camera is placed to visualize the esophagus and stomach (upper endoscopy) or the colon (lower endoscopy or colonoscopy). Gastroenterologists that specialize in the liver is called a Hepatologist. They are responsible for treating patients with liver failure or cirrhosis. They also treat patients with viral Hepatitis (A,B,C) and many other forms of liver disease.\nInternal Medicine.\nDoctors in this specialty are trained to recognize and treat a variety of different conditions involving the internal organs. They have wide knowledge in a number of specialties including, but not limited to: Respirology, Nephrology, Gastroenterology, Cardiology. Doctors who practice broadly in this field are known as General Internists (or General Internal Medicine doctors). Internists can go to receive further training beyond residency in a particular field. For example, Gastroenterologists are internists that have chosen to specialize in GI medicine. Internal medicine doctors are in charge of inpatient units when patients are admitted for a general reason. Unlike family doctors and emergency doctors, although their training is diverse and they have broad knowledge in many organ systems, they do not treat or manage children, babies, or pregnant women. (Those patients are instead cared for by Pediatricians and Obstetrics/gynecology, respectively.)\nGynecology and obstetrics.\nDoctors in this field, abbreviated OBGYN or Obs/Gyn, specialize in women's health covering conditions of the female reproductive organs, and pregnancy care and delivery. Some examples of gynecological issues they deal with include contraceptive medicine, fertility workup and treatments, prolapse and incontinence, sexual health, ovarian tumors/ cysts, gynecological oncology. They are also surgeons in their fields, capable of performing numerous gynecological surgeries. Doctors in this field also practice obstetrical medicine, specializing in maternal fetal care and deliveries, complications related to deliveries, assisted deliveries (such as vacuum and forceps deliveries) and Caesarian sections.\nOphthalmology.\nThis medical specialty consists of well trained doctors who recognize and treat medical conditions associated with the eyes. Some common complaints they see include red eye, eye pain, visual changes and trauma. They deal with many eye diseases including conjunctivitis, iritis, blepharitis, hordeolum, chalazion, glaucoma, cataracts, macular degeneration, retinal detachments, papilloedema, central retinary artery occlusion. They are trained to perform surgery.\nOtolaryngology.\nThese are doctors with special training to treat the ears, nose and throat. These are the doctors who will very commonly remove an organ call the \"tonsils\" from a patient.\nPulmonary.\nThis medical area, commonly known as chest medicine or respiratory medicine, deals with the respiratory system. It usually involves patients who require intensive care including life support and mechanical ventilation. Doctors of this field usually are knowledgeable in diseases and conditions of the chest, such as pneumonia or asthma. Doctors in this field tend to perform minor procedures in surgery of the respiratory tract. Pulmonary specialists often practice critical care medicine. They also manage complicated chest infections."}
{"id": "3794", "revid": "1114705", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3794", "title": "Transport", "text": "Transport, or transportation, is moving people or things from one place to another place. Transport can be divided into \"infrastructure\", \"vehicles\" and \"operations\".\n\"Infrastructure\" includes roads, railways, airports, canals and pipelines. The infrastructure is the network where things are carried. Infrastructure also includes airports, railway stations, bus stations and seaports (docks). Infrastructure is usually built by governments and paid for by taxes from the citizens of a country or region. Infrastructure such as roads and railways are designed by civil engineers and urban planners.\n\"Vehicles\" or vessels travel on the infrastructure. Vehicles include cars, trucks, trains and airplanes. Vehicles are usually designed by mechanical engineers. Vessels include boats, ferries, and barges which travel on canals and use docks and seaports. In the same way that trains use train stations, airplanes use airports. In the same way that trains use railway lines (train tracks), airplanes use flight paths and then fly in the sky.\n\"Operations\" control the system. Operations include traffic signals, railway signals and air traffic control. Operations also include the government policies (a policy is a plan of action to guide decisions and actions) and regulations (a set or group of laws and rules) used to control the system, such as tolls, fuel taxes, and traffic laws.\nTransport and communications.\nTransport and communication can be used instead of each other (someone could telephone a person rather than visit them). Transport traffic also needs communication. For example, air traffic control lets more airplanes fly. So, an increase of either transport or communication usually leads to an increase in the other one. \nTransport, energy, and the environment.\nTransport uses a lot of energy. Most transport uses hydrocarbons (oil and gas). This can create pollution. Environmental regulations (laws) and low-pollution fuels (for example liquified natural gas) can reduce pollution. But as more vehicles are used, more pollution is created. Ethanol and biodiesel pollute less than petroleum.\nKinds of transportation.\nTransport can be by land, water or air:"}
{"id": "3795", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3795", "title": "Road", "text": " A road is a piece of land which connects two or more places. Usually, a road has been made easy to travel on, for example by removing trees and stones so the ground is more level. Although many roads are made of gravel and dirt, some are paved with concrete or bricks or stones.\nPeople have been making roads for a long time. Roman roads in Britain and the Inca road system are famous. Transport by boats on waterways was usually easier and faster than transport by road. In the industrial revolution, the railway was invented. A railway is a special type of road, using railway tracks. Roads are now usually made for wheeled vehicles, like cars, to travel on.\nWhen traffic congestion becomes a frequent problem, the road may be made wider or other roads built.\nRoad building and care is usually paid for by taxes. Some roads are toll roads, where people pay to use the road."}
{"id": "3796", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3796", "title": "2004", "text": "2004 (MMIV) was .\n2004 was the Chinese Year of Wood Monkey based on the 12-year Chinese Zodiac cycle."}
{"id": "3797", "revid": "7664857", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3797", "title": "Hawaiian Islands", "text": " \nFrom west to east, Hawaii is made up of the following Hawaiian Islands:\nHawaii has been a U.S. state since 1959.\nThe Hawaiian islands, plus former islands now below sea level (guyots), make up the Hawaiian\u2013Emperor seamount chain."}
{"id": "3798", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3798", "title": "Mauna Kea", "text": "Mauna Kea is a dormant volcano in the Hawaiian Islands. It is the highest point in Hawaii at 4,205 meters. If measured from top to bottom, below sea level, it is 10,200 meters high and would be the tallest mountain in the world. It is around 1,000,000 years old. Mauna Kea means 'white mountain' because in winter it often has snow at the summit. \nAstronomy.\nMauna Kea is an important site for astronomy. Many different countries or institutions have an observatory there, including the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan. The W. M. Keck Observatory with its 10-meter mirror is one of the most powerful in the world. Mauna Kea is an important site, especially for infrared astronomy, because of its height and clear skies.\nHigh altitude is important because atmosphere causes an effect called seeing, which limits the quality of images by blurring them. At high altitude, there is less atmosphere between the observatories and space and this lessens the effect."}
{"id": "3799", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3799", "title": "Mauna Loa", "text": " \nMauna Loa is an active volcano in the Hawaiian Islands of the United States. \nName.\n\u201cMauna Loa\u201d is Hawaiian for \u201clong mountain\u201d.\nSize.\nThe volcano is at least in volume and over 4 kilometers above sea level. Measured from its base on the ocean floor it reaches above 8 kilometers making it the tallest mountain on Earth, but not the highest. That distinction is reserved for Mount Everest. \nMeasured from sea level Mauna Loa is 4,169 meters high. It is also one of the largest volcanoes measuring 60 miles long and 30 miles wide. \nThe world's biggest volcano is named Mauna Loa in Hawaii. Mauna Loa is part of the five volcanoes on Hawaii's 'Big Island'. The most recent time this volcano erupted was in 1984. It erupted 33 times in the last 170 years. Like all the other Hawaiian volcanoes, Mauna Loa was created by the movement of the Pacific tectonic plate which moved over the Hawaii hotspot in the Earth's mantle. It is a shield volcano. The largest recent eruption from Mauna Loa left a lava trail 51 kilometres (32 miles) long."}
{"id": "3800", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3800", "title": "Kilauea", "text": "K\u012blauea is an active volcano in the Hawaiian Islands. It is a shield volcano. The volcano is 1,277 meters high. K\u012blauea is a large lake of lava. The crater of K\u012blauea is named Pu'u'O'o. The first eruption of K\u012blauea is estimated as 300 to 600 thousand years ago. Its first recorded eruptions were in 1823. Its most recent eruption was March 3 2018. It is still erupting now. The Hawaiian name \"K\u012blauea\" means \"spewing\" or \"much spreading\". It refers to the constant flow of lava. K\u012blauea lies on the curve of volcanoes on the island of Hawaii that includes Mauna Loa and Kohala. The volcano of K\u012blauea is one of the youngest and also is said to be the home of an ancient volcano goddess Pele. The oldest dated rocks are said to be about 23,000 years old. It has its own magma plumbing under the Earth that goes down under the Earths crust by 60 km. K\u012blauea has a basalt-based lava rock type. K\u012blauea was formed on a volcanic hot-spot.\nIn May 2018, the volcano erupted causing damage in nearby homes and streets."}
{"id": "3802", "revid": "2", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3802", "title": "Hawaiian islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "3805", "revid": "21928", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3805", "title": "Fried", "text": ""}
{"id": "3809", "revid": "18539", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3809", "title": "Van", "text": "A van is a type of vehicle. A van can carry either goods or people. A van is usually bigger than the regular sized car. Panel vans (= vans whose cargo space has no side windows) are used for deliveries and carrying goods. These usually have large cargo space and few windows. A van which is used to carry people is often called a \"minibus\". It can usually carry many people, sometimes up to a total of 15. \nMany companies make vans, including: Chevrolet, Daihatsu, Dodge, Fiat, Ford, GMC, Honda, Hyundai, Isuzu, Mazda, Mercedes-Benz, Mitsubishi, Nissan, Subaru, Suzuki, Toyota, Vauxhall, and Volkswagen.\nA minivan is smaller and usually carries up to seven people.\nYou may usually drive a van with the same driver's license as an ordinary car, but the heaviest and largest vans may require a truck licence.\nThe demand for minivans is dwindling due to the introduction of crossovers. However, some companies still make minivans. The most popular minivans are the Toyota Sienna and Honda Odyssey."}
{"id": "3810", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3810", "title": "Luggage", "text": "People use luggage to carry their possessions when travelling. In the United States luggage is often called baggage."}
{"id": "3811", "revid": "7473732", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3811", "title": "Pan", "text": "Pan can mean:"}
{"id": "3813", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3813", "title": "Pantograph", "text": "A pantograph is an machine. It is used in drawing or planning. It makes it easy to copy diagrams. \nThe device that an electric train uses to get its electricity is also called a pantograph, because it looks a bit like the drawing instrument."}
{"id": "3814", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3814", "title": "Paperback", "text": "A paperback is a type of book. It has a cover of thick paper or thin cardboard. Paperback book covers can bend and be folded. The covers are laminated (have layers), and some of the methods are more durable (lasting) than others. Another name for paperback is \"soft cover\". \nPaperback books may be glued or held by sewing. If the pages are held only by adhesive, the book will eventually come apart. The quality of the paper also varies. It is generally less white than bound hardback books because it is less bleached.\nUsually, paperback books cost less money than hardback books. In the middle 20th century a \"mass market\" type of paperback became commonplace, having a standard size, fitting a standard display rack, and glued. "}
{"id": "3815", "revid": "294863", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3815", "title": "Palette", "text": "A palette is used for mixing colours.They are usually made out of plastic or wood but can be made out of other materials. An artist often uses one of these and is in fact an essential item in art, when painting."}
{"id": "3816", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3816", "title": "Glow-worm", "text": "A glow-worm, or glowworm, is an insect.\nOther names for glow-worms are fire-fly and lightning bug.\nThere are several insects given this name. Most are beetles, but one is a fly, \"Arachnocampa\". They are nocturnal, active during the night. They have special organs that can produce light. This is used to find mates. The patterns in which the beetles flash is unique to each species.\nThe major families are"}
{"id": "3817", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3817", "title": "Palette knife", "text": "A palette knife is not actually a knife. It has a very flexible steel blade and no sharpened cutting edge. It is a tool.\nUses.\nA palette knife is used for mixing paint colors. It may be used for mixing and applying a whole range of semi-fluid mixtures."}
{"id": "3819", "revid": "1152007", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3819", "title": "Foolscap", "text": "Foolscap is paper cut to the size of , sometimes . This was a traditional paper size used in Europe and the British Commonwealth, before the adoption of the international standard A4 paper, the most common standard size in the world. Foolscap was so called because, in the 18th century, folio-sized paper had the watermark of a fool's cap on it. Basically, it is taller than A4. \nIn North America, foolscap is lined, legal-size paper. In some South American countries it is called \"oficio\", because it is or was used for official documents.\nPaper of the size is now very rarely used, being superseded by A4 (297 x 210). However, some ring binders, lever arch files, suspended files, and other filing related things still use the size."}
{"id": "3821", "revid": "506417", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3821", "title": "Polymer", "text": "A polymer is a molecule, made from joining together many small molecules called monomers. The word \"polymer\" can be broken down into \"poly\" (meaning \"many\" in Greek) and \"mer\" (meaning \"unit\"). This shows how the chemical composition of a polymer consists of many smaller units (monomers) bonded together into a larger molecule. A chemical reaction bonding monomers together to make a polymer is called polymerization. \nSome polymers are natural and made by organisms. Proteins have polypeptide molecules, which are natural polymers made from various amino acid monomer units. Nucleic acids are huge natural polymers made up of millions of nucleotide units. Cellulose and starch (two types of carbohydrate) are also natural polymers made up of glucopyranose monomer bonded together in different ways. Rubber is a mixture of polymers. Plastics are man-made polymers. Many fibers are made of polymers. \nIf the \"units\" called monomers in a polymer are all the same, then the polymer is called a \"homopolymer\". Homopolymers are named by adding the prefix poly- before the monomer name from which the polymer is made. For example, a polymer made by bonding styrene monomer molecules together is called polystyrene. \nIf the monomers are not all the same, the polymer is called a \"copolymer\" or a \"heteropolymer\". \nMany polymer molecules are like \"chains\" where the monomer units are the links. Polymer molecules can be straight-chain, have \"branching\" from the main chain, or \"cross-linking\" between chains. As an example of cross-linking, sulfhydryl (-S-H) groups in two cysteine amino acid units in polypeptide chains can bond together to make a disulfide bridge (-S-S-) joining the chains together. \nIn the same way how large hydrocarbon molecules in crude oil can be broken down in smaller molecules e.g. ethylene by applying heat (a process called cracking), the monomer ethylene can then be turned into the polymer polyethylene by applying pressure and adding catalysts. Polyethelene is the basis of many plastic objects. "}
{"id": "3823", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3823", "title": "Medium", "text": "Medium might mean:"}
{"id": "3825", "revid": "412970", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3825", "title": "Phrase", "text": "A \"phrase\" is a group of words that adds meaning to a sentence. A phrase is not a sentence because it is not a complete idea with a subject, verb and a predicate. \nIn English there are five different kinds of phrases, one for each of the main parts of speech. In a phrase, the main word, or the word that is what the phrase is about, is called the \"head.\" In these examples, it is printed in \"bold\". The other words in the phrase do the work of changing or \"modifying\" the head.\nIn a 'Noun phrase', one or more words work together to give more information about a noun.\nIn an Adjective phrase, one or more words work together to give more information about an adjective.\nIn a Verb phrase, one or more words work together to give more meaning to a verb. In English, the verb phrase is very complex, but a good description of its many forms can be found here.\nIn an Adverb phrase, one or more words work together to give more information about an adverb.\nIn a Prepositional phrase, one or more words work together to give information about time, location, or possession, or condition. The preposition always appears at the front of the phrase (preposition = pre-position)."}
{"id": "3826", "revid": "1080366", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3826", "title": "Preposition", "text": "Prepositions often describe the position of something, the time when something happens or the way in which something is done. The prepositions \"of\", \"to\" and \"for\" have other functions. \nPrepositions may sometimes be used to end sentences. For example, \"What did you put that there for?\" (better English is the alternative: \"Why did you put that there?\") Example 2: \"A pen is a device to write with\" (better English is \"A pen is a writing device\"). In general, because they are links, prepositions belong in the middle of sentences, rather than at the end.\nThe table below shows some examples of how prepositions are used in sentences.\nHere is a list of common prepositions:"}
{"id": "3827", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3827", "title": "Possess", "text": ""}
{"id": "3828", "revid": "1071614", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3828", "title": "Pronoun", "text": "A pronoun is traditionally a part of speech in grammar, but many modern linguists call it a type of noun. In English, pronouns are words such as \"me, she, his, them, herself, each other, it, what\". \nPronouns are often used to take the place of a noun, to avoid repeating the noun. For example, instead of saying \nit is easier to say \nWhen a pronoun replaces a noun, the noun is called the antecedent. For example, in the sentence: \"The dog that was walking down the street\", the relative pronoun is the word that referring back to the antecedent, the word 'dog'. In the sentence \"The spy who loved me\", the relative pronoun is the word 'who' and its antecedent is the word 'spy'.\nDifferences and similarities to nouns.\nPronouns are different from common nouns because pronouns normally do not come after \"article\"s or other \"determiner\"s. For example, people do not say \"the it\". Pronouns rarely come after adjectives. They are also different because many of them change depending on how they are used. For example, \"we\" is a 'subject' in grammar, but the word changes to \"us\" when used as an object.\nPronouns are the same as nouns because they both change for number (singular &amp; plural), case (subject, object, possessive, etc.), and gender (male, female, animate, inanimate, etc.) Nouns and pronouns can be used in almost all the same places in sentences, and they name the same kinds of things: people, objects, etc. Even though they can not normally come after determiners, or adjectives, neither can proper nouns.\nKinds of pronouns.\nThere are four kinds of pronouns: personal, reciprocal, interrogative, and relative.\nPersonal pronouns in English.\nThis table shows all the personal pronouns in English that are commonly used today.\nA subject pronoun can replace a noun that is the subject of a sentence. Refer to the table above; the subject pronouns are: I, You, He, She, It, We, They. An object pronoun can replace a noun that is the object of a sentence. A possessive pronoun shows who or what a noun belongs to. \nAnother type of personal pronoun is called the 'reflexive pronoun'. Reflexive pronouns are the words ending in '-self' or '-selves', such as: \"myself, itself, themselves\".\n\"It\" and its other forms \"its\", and \"itself\" only refer to objects, not people. \"They\" and its other forms \"them\", \"their\", and \"theirs\" can be used as a singular, for a person whose gender is unknown at the time, or for a person who does not identify with either the \"she/her\" or \"he/him\" pronouns. For example: \"The patient will be told how much \"they\" will be required to pay.\" "}
{"id": "3829", "revid": "1157365", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3829", "title": "Adverb", "text": "An adverb is a word used to tell more about a verb, and it almost always answers the questions \"how?\", \"when?\", \"where?\", \"how often?\", and \"in what way?\". Words like \"slowly\", \"loudly\", \"carefully\", \"quickly\", \"quietly\" or \"sadly\" are all adverbs. Adverbs usuhvgucgugucuct6556935de58vguvguvOvuvuevuevue Enyetuenwuevue Ugbemugbem Osasally, but not always, end in \"-ly\".\nExamples of adverbs in a sentence (with the adverb in italics): that is a weird word and is seen differently\nAn adverb can also modify (describe) an adjective or another adverb\nExamples:\nIn the first two examples the word 'well' is an adverb. In the last example, it is an adjective. This is one example in which the same word can be both an adjective and an adverb but not in the same sentence. \nAs a rule, the same word can play different roles but not in the same sentence. It all depends on what the word is doing in the sentence. It could be a noun, an adjective, an adverb, a verb, etc. Example: take the word 'cool'. In the sentence, \"he walks cool\", the word 'cool' is an adverb. In the sentence, \"cool the hot dish\", the word 'cool' is a verb. In the sentence, \"it is a cool evening\", the word 'cool' is an adjective. In the first example, \"he walks cool\", the word 'cool' really means 'coolly' as in \"play it cool\" (do not get excited; be calm).\nAdverb form.\nMost adverbs are formed by adding ly to the end of an adjective. To see 100 adjectives used in Basic English, click here ---&gt; : adjective"}
{"id": "3837", "revid": "367306", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3837", "title": "Sunday", "text": "Sunday is one of the seven days of the week. It is part of the weekend, along with Saturday. Sunday is the Sabbath or day of worship for most Christians (for example, Easter is celebrated on Sunday). Sunday is the beginning of the week in the United States, but is the end of the week in the United Kingdom."}
{"id": "3838", "revid": "7856663", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3838", "title": "Ottawa", "text": "Ottawa is the capital of Canada and is part of the province of Ontario. It is south of the Ottawa River. In 2004, there were about 808,391 people in the city. The region has about 1,146,790 people. The mayor of the city today (since December 2010) is Jim Watson. Ottawa is in the Ottawa Valley on the border with the province of Quebec which is divided by the Ottawa River. Ottawa is the fourth largest city in Canada and the second largest city in Ontario (after Toronto). Ottawa is the only officially bilingual city in Canada, where the English language and the French language are official languages and have equal status. Every official sign in the city is, as a result bilingual. The reason for this bilingual status, is not only because Ottawa borders the French-speaking province of Quebec, the city itself has a large French-speaking minority.\nWhen people talk about Ottawa, they are sometimes using the name as an eponym meaning the highest government in Canada, and not its local government or the city.\nThe cities of Ottawa, Kanata, Nepean, Gloucester and Vanier and the villages of Manotick and Rockcliffe Park joined in the year 2000 to form the new city of Ottawa. Ottawa also includes Orl\u00e9ans, which joined at that same time.\nThe city began with the name Bytown and became the city of Ottawa in 1855. The Rideau Canal ends in Ottawa.\nOttawa has many museums, many buildings for the government of Canada and many parks. There is a market area downtown.\nThere are many festivals during the year including Winterlude in February, The Tulip Festival in May, and BluesFest in the summer. There is also a large celebration on July 1st for Canada Day.\nThe Ottawa Senators play ice hockey in an arena called The Canadian Tire Centre.\nClimate.\nOttawa has a hot-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfa\").\nRain and snow.\nThe average yearly precipitation in Ottawa is 943 millimetres.\n2017 was a record year in Ottawa because there was precipitation of 1,213 millimetres during the first ten months of the year. The old record was in 1972, when the precipitation was 1,174 millimetres."}
{"id": "3845", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3845", "title": "News agency", "text": "A news agency is a kind of company. It supplies information to newspapers, radio and television.\nIn the United Kingdom and some other countries a news agency or newsagent is a shop which sells newspapers, magazines and cigarettes."}
{"id": "3846", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3846", "title": "Mudguard", "text": "A mudguard, fender or wing is a part covering the wheels of a vehicle to stop it from throwing off mud, water or objects from the road. It protects people and property from dirtiness, dampness, and damage. \nMudguards protect in several ways:"}
{"id": "3847", "revid": "1026804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3847", "title": "Para rubber tree", "text": "A Para rubber tree (or simply, rubber tree) is the tree which naturally produces rubber. It is native to tropical areas from South America, in the Amazon (Brazil), but was spread by European farmers to the Far East.\nPara Rubber trees belong to the Euphorbiaceae family. In the wild they may reach heights of 100 to 125 ft (30-38 m) with large cylindrical trunks with or without buttresses. Crop trees reach a width of about 20 in. (50 cm), usually with a short bole, and with a sloped taper. \nMost rubber plantations are in South Asia and Southeast Asia. When trees reach 5-6 years old, they are harvested. Their trunks are cut just deep enough to tap the vessels without harming the tree's growth, and the sap is collected in small buckets. This process is known as rubber tapping. Older trees produce more latex, but they stop producing it after 30-40 years."}
{"id": "3848", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3848", "title": "Safety curtain", "text": "A safety curtain is a curtain in theatre at the front of the stage. It is made of material that will not burn. The safety curtain may be lowered during the intermission and after the performance. A safety curtain is there in case there is a fire on stage. It will stop the fire from spreading to the auditorium where the audience sits."}
{"id": "3849", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3849", "title": "Safety lamp", "text": "A safety lamp is a miner's lamp with a covered flame that used to be used in coal mines.\nTypes of safety lamps.\nThe first safety lamp was invented by William Reid Clanny. It used bellows and water to separate gasses. Later, two newer designs were invented. One newer design was the Geordie lamp, made by George Stephenson, and the other was the Davy lamp, made by Sir Humphry Davy. In 1815, Davy discovered that if a flame was in a lamp, it would not ignite the flammable gases in mines. \nHow it works.\nCoal mines are dangerous because of flammable gasses like methane that can accumulate (gather together). A lamp with a naked (exposed) flame might make these flammable gasses catch fire, causing an explosion, which could kill people. The safety lamp prevents the hot flame of the lamp touching the flammable gasses, reducing the chance of an explosion."}
{"id": "3850", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3850", "title": "Christmas stocking", "text": "A Christmas stocking is a long sock hung by a fireplace or bed on Christmas Eve. Christmas presents are put into it for children. It came from an old legend. Stockings are now a European Christmas tradition."}
{"id": "3853", "revid": "1035196", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3853", "title": "List of Austrian football teams", "text": "These are the Austrian football teams and the leagues they played in for the 2010/11 season.\n\"Heute f\u00fcr Morgen\" Erste Liga (Second Division).\nThe champion of the league promotes to the Austrian Bundesliga.\nRegionalliga (Third Division).\nThe Regionalliga is divided into three sections. The second teams of clubs from the first division are not allowed to promote to the Second Division."}
{"id": "3854", "revid": "7610516", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3854", "title": "2001", "text": "2001 (MMI) was ."}
{"id": "3856", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3856", "title": "Sex", "text": "Sex is a type of reproduction common among living things. Sex is used by plants and animals, and also by fungi and various single-celled organisms. It usually needs two individuals which are different sexes from the same species. It works by combining genes from more than one source.\nBiological type.\nOrganisms may have more than one kind of reproduction:\nBenefits and drawbacks.\nAsexual reproduction is easier than sexual reproduction, but there are benefits and drawbacks to both:\nHumans.\nIn humans, sex is normally either male or female. For example: John's sex is male. Jane's sex is female. Most of the time, the sex of a person depends on what sex chromosomes that person got from his or her parents. A woman's ovum (egg cell) contains one X chromosome. A man's sperm contains either an X or a Y chromosome. When a sperm and ova combine to form a fertilised egg, the baby may get either of these chromosomes from its father. If the baby gets two X chromosomes, it will develop into a female. If the baby gets one X and one Y, it will develop into a male. Before babies are born, their sex parts are already formed, but not ready yet. During Puberty, the sex parts finish developing as well as other parts of the body like breasts and body hair.\nThere are some exceptions to this rule. Sometimes, the process of meiosis, which makes the sex cells, can go differently. This can result in a person having 3 X chromosomes, or 2 Y chromosomes or XXY instead of XY. Other times, the body may not follow exactly what their chromosomes are telling it to do.\nEvolution.\nSexual reproduction first appeared about a billion years ago. It evolved within single-celled eukaryotes. The scientific community still discusses why it appeared, and why it still exists. Reasons commonly given include:\nSexual reproduction is a process that can only be found in eukaryotes. These cells have a nucleus and mitochondria. There are other kinds of organisms (other than animals, plants and fungi), the other eukaryotes \u2013 such as the malaria parasite \u2013 that also engage in sexual reproduction. Some bacteria use conjugation to transfer genetic material between bacteria. This is not the same as sexual reproduction, but it results in a similar mixture of genetic traits.\nIn sexual reproduction the cells used for reproduction, called gametes, are either eggs or sperms. Fertilisation needs two different such cells. The mechanism of cell division only works when one sperm alone enters the egg. Once it is in, a fast reaction goes through the egg cell wall to shut off all other sperm.\nSex determination.\nSex determination in biology is about the function of sex, not what individuals look like. In humans, males and females usually look different. In many species they do not, except for the sex organs.\nSex can be determined in different ways:\nWhen there is sex determination there are basically two cases:\nGenetic.\nUsually, sex is determined by an organism's genes. With genetic sex determination, most alleles or genes that influence sexual development are on the same chromosome. That chromosome is then called the sex chromosome. Because genetic sex determination is controlled by a pair of sex chromosomes (or if of one of the chromosomes is there or not), there are usually the same number of male and female offspring. In humans, for instance, sperms carry either an X or a Y chromosome, and they occur in roughly equal numbers.\nNongenetic.\nFor some species sex is not determined by inheritance, but instead by environmental factors experienced during development or later in life. Many reptiles have temperature-dependent sex determination: the temperature embryos experience during their development determines the sex of the organism. In some turtles, for example, males are produced at lower incubation temperatures than females; this difference in critical temperatures can be as little as 1-2\u00a0\u00b0C.\nSome fish change sex over the course of their life. This phenomenon is called \"sequential hermaphroditism\". In clownfish, smaller fish are male, and the dominant and largest fish in a group becomes female. In many wrasse the opposite is true\u2014most fish are female at birth and become male when they reach a certain size. Sequential hermaphrodites may produce both types of gametes over the course of their lifetime, but at any given point they are either female or male.\nIn some ferns the default sex is hermaphrodite. Ferns which grow in soil which has previously supported hermaphrodites are influenced by hormones remaining to develop as male."}
{"id": "3857", "revid": "680269", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3857", "title": "Hacksaw", "text": "A hacksaw is a tool for sawing. A hacksaw is designed for cutting materials like very thin metals and plastic. It has a handle on one end, and can be either pushed or pulled across the object being cut. There are manual and electric hacksaws."}
{"id": "3858", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3858", "title": "Spade", "text": "In gardening, a spade is a tool for digging. It is similar to a shovel. It has a straight handle. For some purposes the difference between a spade and a shovel is important. It is hard to move gravel with a spade but a proper shovel can do it.\nIn games, a spade is one of the four shapes or \"suits\" on playing cards. "}
{"id": "3859", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3859", "title": "Hoe (tool)", "text": "A hoe is a tool in farming and gardening. It has a blade, usually metal, attached to a long handle, usually wood. There are many types of blade and several uses, probably the most common of which is weeding. Other uses include shaping the soil and harvesting root crops such as potatoes. Along with the spade and fork, the hoe is considered a basic, essential hand farming implement."}
{"id": "3860", "revid": "1054851", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3860", "title": "Shovel", "text": "A shovel is a tool used for moving loose material. Shovels have a flat bottom head which is angled slightly from the handle to enable scooping and moving of material. \nAlthough a shovel can be used for digging, it is much less efficient than a spade. Spades are straight, and transmit force straight downwards. Shovels move loose material, such as coal, snow, gravel etc. They are usually made of metal at the bottom, and wood is sometimes used for the handle."}
{"id": "3861", "revid": "5295", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3861", "title": "Plunger", "text": "A plunger is a tool. It is used to get rid of things that are blocking pipes. The plunger is placed over one end of the pipe, and the handle is pushed up and down. Doing this creates a sucking force, which makes the thing blocking the pipe move and unclog."}
{"id": "3862", "revid": "7844820", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3862", "title": "Ladder", "text": "A ladder is a tool which is made for people to climb up or down. Ladders have two vertical supports that go along the whole length of the ladder. Between these supports are the horizontal rungs. The rung is what the climber can put his foot on. The climber can use his hands to hold on to the rungs above him, or to the supports at the side.\nLadders can be made of metal, wood or even rope. There are different types of ladders.\nSome ladders are made in one piece. They can be carried around and made to lean against something such as the wall of a house. There should be a good distance between the bottom of the ladder and the wall so that the ladder is not too vertical, otherwise the ladder might fall backwards and the climber would fall off. Sometimes these ladders are extension ladders. Extension ladders are made in two or more sections so that the ladder can fold up to make it easier to carry about and to store. To open up the ladder, each section slides up almost to the top of the next section.\nStep ladders are useful in the home or the garden to reach things that are not too high, e.g. ceilings or the tops of hedges. They have two parts which are joined together by a hinge, so that they are shaped like an upside down V. There is usually a platform at the top to stand on, but this can be dangerous unless great care is taken that the ladder will not wobble or fall down.\nSome ladders are vertical (they go straight up or down). These are fixed onto something. Examples are: ladders in a swimming pool for climbing in and out of the water, small ladders to climb up to a top bunk bed, ladders at the side of a big boat or at the side of a canal lock or of any other high or low construction where workmen may need to get up or down to do repairs.\nFire engines always have ladders. They often have a turntable ladder which makes it possible for the ladder to be facing in any direction.\nRope ladders can be folded away easily. They may be used for climbing trees or for rock climbing or in caves."}
{"id": "3863", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3863", "title": "Open end spanner", "text": ""}
{"id": "3864", "revid": "2133", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3864", "title": "Adjustable spanner", "text": ""}
{"id": "3867", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3867", "title": "Oral history", "text": "Oral history is history that is told rather than written down. It is given through talking rather than reading a book. It is usually passed from generation to generation in order to explain events that have occurred. \nThough today oral history is not as popular as written history, it is still used in many places as a way of transferring knowledge about the past."}
{"id": "3868", "revid": "1035902", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3868", "title": "Generation", "text": "A generation can mean any group that is sorted by the time they were created.\nIn a family, a generation means all the people on one level of a family tree. For example, your brothers, sisters and cousins are in the same generation as you.\nIn populations of people, a \u201cgeneration\u201d means groups of people born in different periods of time. Each generation lasts for the average amount of time between the birth of parents, and the birth of their children.\n\u201dGeneration\u201d can also mean a wave or series of something, like a generation of car model (2nd generation for example). Anything that is created in waves can have generations or editions. "}
{"id": "3870", "revid": "188696", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3870", "title": "Gene", "text": "Genes are parts of DNA. DNA is a molecule inside a cell that carries the instructions for making the proteins the cell will need. Each gene contains a single set of instructions. These instructions usually code for a particular protein. Humans have about 20,000 genes that code proteins and many more that are non-coding. Half of a person's genes come from the mother. The other half come from the father.\nThe definition.\nOriginally: a hereditary unit which occupies a specific position (\"locus\") on a chromosome. Other definitions are ways the gene showed itself: \nModern definitions must take note of later discoveries. There are now two classes of genes:p173\nWhat genes do.\nGenes are passed on from parent to child and are an important part of what decides how children look and act (their biological properties). Genes affect the way our bodies work, including how we look. Our eye, hair and skin color are decided by genes. It is said that genes cause \"genetic\" effects in our bodies.\nA gene may be \"dominant\" or \"recessive\". These terms refer to the effect a gene has on the offspring who carry it in their genome.\nFor example, let's say a mother only has genes for brown hair and a father only has genes for red hair. The child will inherit \u2013 receive \u2013 genes for red hair (from her father) and brown hair (from her mother). The brown hair gene is 'dominant' to the red hair gene. This means the child will have brown hair even though she has genes for both red and brown hair. This means only one dominant gene is needed for the child to receive that particular trait, while two recessive genes are needed for one.\nA recessive trait might stay hidden for many generations. Let us use the child from the last example. We will call her \"Mary\". Mary has brown hair but has genes for both red and brown hair. Let us say Mary grew up and married Tom. Tom also has brown hair, but like Mary one of his parents had red hair. This means Tom has genes for both red and brown hair. Mary and Tom would each have a chance of passing either brown or red hair genes to their children. This means that the children of Mary and Tom could have either red or brown hair. This explains why a person might look different from their parents, but look like their grandparents or great grandparents.\nStructure and function.\nThe structure of a gene has many elements: the actual protein coding sequence is only a small part. There are DNA regions that are not transcribed as well as untranslated regions of the RNA."}
{"id": "3872", "revid": "794806", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3872", "title": "Alliteration", "text": "Alliteration is when a sentence or phrase has many words that start with the same sound. It is commonly used in advertising, poetry, headlines, and tongue-twisters. Basically the first consonant repeats itself throughout the sentence.\nAlliteration is common for poetry. It was used one thousand years ago in Anglo-Saxon poems. A fine example is a strophe from \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" by Samuel Taylor Coleridge:\nRobert Browning used alliteration many times, too. he employed it in the poem \"Summum bonum\". This is a Latin expression and means \"all the best\".\nAlliteration is most commonly used in modern music but is also seen in magazine article titles, advertisements, business names, comic strip or cartoon characters, common sayings, and a variety of other titles and expressions.\nOne example of alliteration is \"Sally sold sea shells by the sea shore\". In \"Death Note\", the pseudonym of the detective, L, is Ryuzaki Ryuga, his real name is L Lawliet.\nOften, characters in books are named with alliteration. Many names in Harry Potter feature alliterations (for example, Godric Gryffindor, Helga Hufflepuff, Rowena Ravenclaw, and Salazar Slytherin). Similarly, in \"Hairspray\", most characters' names feature alliterations (e.g. Tracy Turnblad, Link Larkin, Corny Collins, Dan Dougherty, Penny Pingleton, and Seaweed Stubbs).\nTitles of books sometimes use alliteration, including the titles of all thirteen books (except the last one) in Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events. Author Jeff Lindsay's novels about serial killer Dexter Morgan all feature alliteration in their titles: for example, Darkly Dreaming Dexter. Another example is William Shakespeare's Love's Labour's Lost.\nA common application of alliteration is in books intended for children learning about letters. Animalia by Graeme Base famously applies alliteration within a storybook, going in order through each letter of the English alphabet and providing many sentences with alliteration.\nPlaces in books: Bat Barn, Terror Tombs, Vampire Village, etc.\nCode names: The release names of the Linux distribution, Ubuntu (e.g. Breezy Badger, Hoary Hedgehog, Feisty Fawn, etc.).\nGame Titles: Prince of Persia (also the tag: Prince of Persia \u2013 Warrior Within).\nBrand Names and Alliteration\nCompanies company use this alliterative effect all the time. The major reason companies use this technique is to ensure that their brand name is memorable. Think, for example, of all of the famous and well known brands and companies that have used alliteration in their names:\n\u2022Dunkin\u2019 Donuts\n\u2022PayPal\n\u2022Best Buy\n\u2022Coca-Cola\n\u2022LifeLock\n\u2022Park Place\n\u2022American Apparel\n\u2022American Airlines\n\u2022Chuckee Cheese\u2019s\n\u2022Bed Bath &amp; Beyond\n\u2022Krispy Kreme\n\u2022The Scotch and Sirloin\nFamous People and Alliteration\nAlliterative names can also help you stand out in the crowd and can make you more memorable. For example, both fictional characters and real people may stand out in your head as a result of the alliterative effect of their name. Think of:\n\u2022Ronald Reagan\n\u2022Sammy Sosa\n\u2022Jesse Jackson\n\u2022Michael Moore\n\u2022William Wordsworth\n\u2022Mickey Mouse\n\u2022Porky Pig\n\u2022Lois Lane\n\u2022Marilyn Monroe\n\u2022Fred Flintstone\n\u2022Donald Duck\n\u2022SpongeBob SquarePants\n\u2022Seattle Seahawks\n\u2022Katie Courec (Remember, alliterative words don\u2019t even necessarily have to start with the same letter, they simply have to have the same first sound).\nPhrases and quotes.\nFinally, many famous phrases, quotes and saying also make use of alliteration:\n\u2022Busy as a bee\n\u2022Dead as a doornail\n\u2022Get your goat\n\u2022Give up the ghost\n\u2022Good as gold\n\u2022Home sweet home\n\u2022Last laugh\n\u2022Leave in the Lurch\n\u2022Living the life\n\u2022Look to your laurels\n\u2022Mad as a March hare\n\u2022Make a mountain out of a molehill\n\u2022Method to the madness\n\u2022Moaning Minnie\n\u2022Neck and neck\n\u2022Not on your nelly\n\u2022Out of order\n\u2022Pleased as punch\n\u2022Pooh-pooh\n\u2022Primrose path\n\u2022Right as rain\n\u2022Right roughshod\n\u2022Round Robin\nAlliteration is commonly used since it adds interest to a sentence and can be a great way to help you remember names and phrases that you might other wide forget. Enjoy alliteration. It is a very fun and useful literary device."}
{"id": "3873", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3873", "title": "Homophone", "text": "Homophones are words that sound the same as another word but have a different meaning, and often a different spelling.\nExamples include:"}
{"id": "3874", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3874", "title": "Condensation", "text": "Condensation is the process through which gas changes into a liquid when it touches a cooler surface. Condensation is an important part of the water cycle. It is the opposite of evaporation. \nProcess.\nCondensation of water is when water changes from gas to a liquid or crystal shape. Any gas can condense, either because the temperature is dropping or the pressure is increasing. In either case the pressure of the condensing gas is higher than the vapor pressure of the gas, at that temperature).\nDuring condensation, the molecules in the matter slow down. Heat energy is taken away, causing the state of matter to change.\nCondensation is exothermic. This means that condensation makes the temperature go up. Evaporation is the opposite and causes a temperature loss.\nIt is a useful process. One use is in distillation. The gas made from a boiling liquid mix is sent to a condenser, where the different parts condense differently. This can purify a liquid, such as alcohol or water. The condensing liquid makes heat, which must be removed for the condensation to continue.\nOther websites.\nkinematics"}
{"id": "3875", "revid": "1079008", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3875", "title": "Precipitation", "text": "Precipitation is a form of water from the atmosphere. It is a term in meteorology, and includes rain, snow, sleet, ice pellets dew, frost, and hail. These form by condensation from atmospheric water vapor, and fall under gravity.\nFog and mist are not precipitation but suspensions. In that case, the water vapor does not condense sufficiently to precipitate. \nIf liquid, precipitation can be measured using a rain gauge. The most common form of solid precipitation is snow. Snow is made when temperatures are so cold that water vapor changes directly to solid crystals. Frozen rain is hail or ice pellets."}
{"id": "3876", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3876", "title": "Relief rain", "text": ""}
{"id": "3877", "revid": "515", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3877", "title": "Convection rain", "text": ""}
{"id": "3878", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3878", "title": "Relative humidity", "text": "Relative humidity is a way of describing how much humidity is present in the air, compared to how much there could be. Meteorologists often use the relative humidity as a measurement to describe the weather at various places.\nWhen the temperature is warm, more water vapor can be in the air than when it is cold. If the actual amount of vapor is compared to the total amount there could be as a fraction, then the number tells if the air feels dry or moist. The value is usually written in percent, where 0% means that the air is totally dry, and 100% means that it is so moist that mist or dew is about to form.\nWhen the temperature is lowered to the dew point, relative humidity become 100% and the water vapor condenses, making precipitation as dew, rain or snow (etc.)."}
{"id": "3879", "revid": "7629", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3879", "title": "Doldrums", "text": ""}
{"id": "3880", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3880", "title": "Vitamin C", "text": "Vitamin C, also known as ascorbic acid, is a vitamin. It is found in fresh fruits, berries and vegetables. It is one of the water-soluble vitamins.\nVitamin C is important in wound healing. Without enough vitamin C, a person can get a sickness called scurvy. Lack of vitamin C was a serious health problem on long ocean trips where supplies of fresh fruit were quickly used up. Many people died from scurvy on such trips.\nMost animals make their own vitamin C. Some mammals cannot. Those that cannot include the main suborder of primates, the Haplorrhini: these are the tarsiers, monkeys and apes, including humans. Others are bats, capybaras and guinea pigs.\nVitamin C was first discovered in 1928. In 1932, it was proved to stop the sickness called scurvy. That fruit was a cure for scurvy was known long before vitamins were known to exist.\nHistory.\nThrough history the need for people to eat fresh plant food to help them get through long sieges or long sea trips was known by some wise people but was often forgotten.\nThe first attempt to prove this idea was by a ship's doctor in the British Royal Navy called James Lind, who at sea in May 1747 gave some crew members lemon juice as well as their normal ships food, while others continued on normal food alone.\nThe results showed that lemons prevented the disease. Lind wrote up his work and published it in 1753.\nLind's work was slow to be noticed. In 1795 the British navy adopted lemon or lime juice as food for sailors.\nAs well as lemons, limes and oranges; sauerkraut, salted cabbage, malt, and soup were tried with different effects. James Cook relied on sauerkraut to prevent the disease on his long voyages of exploration.\nIt was believed that only humans got scurvy but in 1907, Alex Holst and Theodore Frohlich, two Norwegian chemists found that guinea pigs could also get it if not given fresh food.\nIn 1928 the Arctic explorer Vilhjalmur Stefansson proved that Eskimo (Inuit) people are able to avoid scurvy with almost no plant food in their diet by eating raw meat.\nIn 1912 the Polish American scientist Casimir Funk first used the word \"vitamin\" for something present in food in small amounts that is essential to health. He named the unknown thing that prevented scurvy \"Vitamin C\".\nFrom 1928 to 1933, the Hungarian research team of Joseph L Svirbely and Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, and separately the American Charles Glen King, first took out vitamin C from food and showed it to be an acid they called \"ascorbic acid\".\nIn 1933/1934, the British chemists Norman Haworth and Edmund Hirst, and separately the Polish Tadeus Reichstein, successfully synthesized the vitamin.\nIt was the first man-made vitamin. This made it possible to make lots of vitamin C cheaply in factories. Haworth won the 1937 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for this work.\nIn 1959 the American J.J. Burns showed that the reason why some animals get scurvy is because their liver cannot make one chemical enzyme that other animals have.\nSources.\nPlant sources.\nCitrus fruits (such as lime, Indian gooseberry, lemon, orange, and grapefruit) are good sources of vitamin C.\nOther foods that are good sources of vitamin C include papaya, broccoli, brussels sprouts, blackcurrants, strawberries, cauliflower, spinach, cantaloupe, sweet peppers, and kiwifruit.\nThe following table is to give an idea of how much vitamin C is in different plant foods. Each individual fruit will vary.\nThe amount of vitamin C in foods of plant origin depends on the kind of plant, the kind of soil where it grew, how much rain and sun it got, the length of time since it was picked, and how it was stored since then.\nCooking food destroys vitamin C.\nAnimal sources.\nMost species of animals synthesise their own vitamin C. It is therefore not a vitamin for them. Synthesis is achieved through a sequence of enzyme driven steps, which convert glucose to ascorbic acid. It is carried out either in the kidneys, in reptiles and birds, or the liver, in mammals and perching birds. The loss of an enzyme concerned with ascorbic acid synthesis has occurred quite frequently in evolution and has affected most fish, many birds; some bats, guinea pigs and most but not all primates, including humans. The mutations have not been lethal because ascorbic acid is so prevalent in the surrounding food sources.\nIt was only realised in the 1920s that some cuts of meat and fish are also a source of vitamin C for humans. The muscle and fat that make up the modern western diet are however poor sources. As with fruit and vegetables cooking destroys the vitamin C content.\nArtificial chemical synthesis.\nVitamin C is produced from glucose by two main routes. The Reichstein process developed in the 1930s uses a single pre-fermentation followed by a purely chemical route. The more modern Two-Step fermentation process was originally developed in China in the 1960s, uses additional fermentation to replace part of the later chemical stages. Both processes yield approximately 60% vitamin C from the glucose feed.\nIn 1934, the Swiss pharmaceutical company Hoffmann-La Roche was the first to mass-produce synthetic vitamin C, under the brand name of Redoxon.\nMain producers today are BASF/ Takeda, Roche, Merck and the China Pharmaceutical Group Ltd of the People's Republic of China.\nFunctions of vitamin C in the body.\nIn living organisms, ascorbate is an antioxidant, since it protects the body against oxidative stress. It is also a cofactor in at least eight enzymatic reactions, including several collagen synthesis reactions that cause the most severe symptoms of scurvy when they are dysfunctional. In animals, these reactions are especially important in wound-healing and in preventing bleeding from capillaries.\nVitamin C deficiency.\nLack of ascorbic acid in the daily diet leads to a disease\ncalled scurvy, a form of avitaminosis that is characterized by:\nDaily requirement.\nA healthy person on a balanced western diet should be able to get all the vitamin C needed to prevent the symptoms of scurvy from their daily diet. People who smoke, those under stress and women in pregnancy have a slightly higher requirement.\nThe amount of vitamin C needed to avoid deficiency symptoms and maintain health has been set by variously national agencies as follows:\nSome researchers have calculated the amount needed for an adult human to achieve similar blood serum levels as Vitamin C synthesising mammals as follows:\nHigh doses (thousands of mg) may result in diarrhoea, which is harmless if the dose is reduced immediately. Some researchers (Cathcart) claim the onset of diarrhoea to be an indication of where the body\u2019s true vitamin C requirement lies.\nThe small size of the ascorbic acid molecule means the kidneys cannot retain it in the body. Quite a low level in the blood serum will cause traces to be present in the urine. All vitamin C synthesising mammals have traces in the urine at all times.\nIn April 1998 \"Nature\" reported alleged carcinogenic and teratogenic effects of excessive doses of vitamin C. This was given great prominence in the world's media. The effects were noted in test tube experiments and on only two of the 20 markers of free radical damage to DNA. They have not been supported by further evidence from living organisms. Almost all mammals manufacture their own vitamin C in amounts equivalent to human doses of thousands of milligrams per day. Large amounts of the vitamin are used in orthomolecular medicine and no harmful effects have been observed even in doses of 10,000\u00a0mg per day or more.\nTherapeutic uses.\nVitamin C is needed in the diet to prevent scurvy. It also has a reputation for being useful in the treatment of colds and flu. The evidence to support this idea, however, is ambiguous and the effect may depend on the dose size and dosing regime. The Vitamin C Foundation recommends 8\u00a0grams of vitamin C every half hour to show an effect on cold symptoms.\nVitamin C advocacy.\nFred R. Klenner, a doctor in Reidsville, North Carolina reported in 1949 that poliomyelitis yielded to repeated megadoses of intravenous vitamin C.\nNobel Prize winning chemist Linus Pauling began actively promoting vitamin C in the 1960s as a means to greatly improve human health and resistance to disease.\nA minority of medical and scientific opinion continues to see vitamin C as being a low cost and safe way to treat infectious disease and to deal with a wide range of poisons.\nA meta-study of the published research claimed that relatively high levels of vitamin C must be maintained in the body for it to function effectively as an antioxidant.\nSome research shows that there are veterinary benefits of vitamin C as well.\nOne meta-study of the published research examined the effectiveness of ascorbic acid in the treatment of infectious disease and toxins. It was conducted in 2002 by Dr. Thomas Levy, Medical Director of the Colorado Integrative Medical Center in Denver. It claimed that overwhelming scientific evidence exists for its therapeutic role.\nSome vitamin C advocates say that vitamin C is not used therapeutically because it cannot be patented. Pharmaceutical companies seek to generate revenue and profit their shareholders. They may be reluctant to research or promote something that will make them little money."}
{"id": "3881", "revid": "705068", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3881", "title": "Dichlorphenolindophenol", "text": "DCPIP (its full name is \"2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol\") is a blue chemical used as a dye because when it is oxidized it is blue. Once DCPIP is reduced (by addition of electrons) it does not have a color anymore. This reaction can be reversed, and the colourless DCPIP will turn blue again, when it is oxidized.\nPurpose.\nDCPIP is often used to measure the electron transport chain in plants. It has a higher redox potential (electron affinity) than the Fe-S complex in cytochrome b and will therefore \"steal\" electrons from it. This means that cytochrome c does not receive them. The process cuts off the electron supply of photosystem I. A common way to illustrate this change is by the addition of vitamin C solution. This reduces the 'jelly' by transforming it to a colourless mass. This experiment can be carried out to illustrate the effect of changing cell sizes on SA/V (surface area:volume ratio). This is known as Titration."}
{"id": "3882", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3882", "title": "Healthy diet", "text": "A healthy diet or balanced diet is a diet (what you eat) that contains the right amounts of all the food groups. It includes fruit, vegetables, grains, dairy products, and protein. It does not include too much or too little of any kind of food. Eating wrong amounts of a food group, whether it be too much or too little, is called an \"unhealthy diet\" or an \"imbalanced diet\". A healthy diet is one that includes more foods that come from plants and fewer convenience foods. \nBasic nutrition.\nWhat is known about nutrition and diet keeps changing as more is learned. However, basic nutrition remains much the same. The best advice is to talk to a doctor or dietitian for personalized information based on an individual's lifestyle, health, and food likes and dislikes.\nSpecial diets.\nThere are some diets made for people with some diseases. Here are some examples:"}
{"id": "3883", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3883", "title": "Dye", "text": "Dye is a substance used to color materials. It is often used to color the fabric used to make clothing. It has low solubility. A pigment won't do this because it won't stick to the fibers of the fabric and color them. A dye can be natural, usually made from plant material such as berries, or artificial, meaning that it is made by humans from chemicals such as petrochemicals.\nMost natural dyes are gotten from different parts of a plant like the roots, fruits, bark, leaves, wood, fungi and lichens. Most dyes are synthetic and are made from petrochemicals.\nClassification.\nDyes can be classified based on their solubility and chemical properties. "}
{"id": "3885", "revid": "111904", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3885", "title": "Oxidized", "text": ""}
{"id": "3886", "revid": "103847", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3886", "title": "Poetry", "text": "Poetry is a type of art form and a type of literature. \nPoetry uses the qualities of words, in different ways, to be artistic.\nPoetry can be as short as a few words, or as long as a book. A poem as short as one line is called a monostich. A poem that is as long as a book is an epic. \nThere are many \"poetic forms\" (forms of poetry). Some of forms are: Sonnet, Haiku, Ballad, Stev, Prose poem, Ode, Free verse, Blank verse, thematic, limerick and nursery rhymes.\nPoetry can be used to describe (comparing, talking about, or expressing emotion) many things. It can make sense or be nonsense, it can rhyme or not. It can have many shapes and sizes; it can be serious or funny. \n\"To say something poetically\" means to give information in an artistic way.\nDigital Poetry.\nA more modern approach is digital poetry. Computers and webtechnology is used to express poetry and make it interactive. So called interdisciplinary poetry (wich means combination of different forms of poetry) are made possible by linking the poetic texts with audio, video or web-animation (e.g. with CSS) or among themselves via hyperlinks. Modern artists use digital poetry to not only express artistic intention, but also to design a layout around their texts. An example for this use of interdisciplinary art, which combines abstract text and abstract visuals is the german project \"Schwarzer Flamingo\". It uses digital poetry to collect pieces of written art but also to give different artists a plattform. So some projects of digital art can be described as a form of an artwork as well as an exhibition."}
{"id": "3887", "revid": "1135724", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3887", "title": "Literature", "text": "Literature is a group of works of art made up of words. Most are written, but some are passed on by word of mouth. Literature usually means works of poetry, theather or narrative that are especially well written. There are many different kinds of literature, such as poetry, plays, or novels. They can also be put into groups through their language, historical period, origin, genre, and subject. The word \"literature\" comes from the Latin word \"learning, writing, grammar\".\nMost of the earliest works were epic poems. Epic poems are long stories or myths about adventures. \"Ramayana\" and \"Mahabharta\", two Indian epics, are still read today. \"Odyssey\" and \"Iliad\" are two famous Greek poems by Homer. They were passed down through speaking and written down around the 8th century BC.\nLiterature can also mean imaginative or creative writing, which is looked at for its artistic value."}
{"id": "3888", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3888", "title": "Imagination", "text": "Imagination is the ability to form images of things or events in one's mind. When someone \"imagines\" something, they are trying to picture something in their mind that they are not experiencing at the moment or that is not really happening. \nImagination is a way to have fun, Imagination can also cause distress."}
{"id": "3889", "revid": "7885425", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3889", "title": "Calorimeter", "text": "A calorimeter is a tool that measures the amount of thermal energy contained in a substance, or released in a reaction. A commonplace use is to measure heat of combustion. \n&lt;br&gt;A calorimeter is an object used for calorimetry, or the process of measuring the heat of chemical reactions or physical changes as well as heat capacity. Differential scanning calorimeters, isothermal micro calorimeters, titration calorimeters and accelerated rate calorimeters are among the most common types. A simple calorimeter just consists of a thermometer attached to a metal container full of water suspended above a combustion chamber. It is one of the measurement devices used in the study of thermodynamics, chemistry, and biochemistry.\nTo find the enthalpy change per mole of a substance A in a reaction between two substances A and B, the substances are separately added to a calorimeter and the initial and final temperatures (before the reaction has started and after it has finished) are noted. Multiplying the temperature change by the mass and specific heat capacities of the substances gives a value for the energy given off or absorbed during the reaction. Dividing the energy change by how many moles of A were present gives its enthalpy change of reaction.\nWhere q is the amount of heat according to the change in temperature measured in joules and Cv is the heat capacity of the calorimeter which is a value associated with each individual apparatus in units of energy per temperature \n(joules/kelvin)."}
{"id": "3890", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3890", "title": "Bolus", "text": "In biology, a bolus (from the Latin word for \"ball\"), is a ball-shaped living thing.\nIn medicine, a \"bolus\" is a large amount of a drug given to patients to raise the blood level before treatment.\nA \"bolus\" can also refer to a ball of food after it has been chewed. It passes down the oesophagus by peristalsis."}
{"id": "3891", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3891", "title": "Oesophagus", "text": "The oesophagus (or esophagus) is also called the gullet. It is the part of the gastrointestinal system between the mouth and the stomach. It connects the pharynx and the stomach. It is about long.\nThe oesophagus is lined with muscle, and is lubricated. Its muscle pushes food down into the stomach. The oesophagus can contract or expand to allow for the passage of food. The muscular movement that pushes the food down the oesophagus is called peristalsis. At the entrance to the stomach there is a ring of muscle called a sphincter. This is usually closed, but relaxes as food approaches, allowing it to enter the stomach. In the stomach, the food is churned until it turns into a soupy mixture called chyme."}
{"id": "3892", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3892", "title": "Protease", "text": "A protease is a digestive enzyme. It breaks down long chains of proteins into shorter amino acids. Proteases have evolved a number of times. We know this because different kinds of protease can do the same reaction in completely different ways. Proteases are found in animals, plants, bacteria, archaea and viruses.\nNow more than 50 types of protease are known. Each is a separate evolutionary origin of proteolysis.\nProtease can be divided into 6 types :"}
{"id": "3894", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3894", "title": "Dental floss", "text": "Dental floss is a special type of thread. It is used for cleaning spaces between teeth which cannot be reached by toothbrushes. It is important to floss before brushing teeth and to floss at least once a day. Tooth brushing will not clean food that is packed between teeth. This 'food packing' can lead to unhealthy teeth and gums. Bacteria grow in this 'packed food' between teeth. These bacteria cause the surface of teeth (enamel) to break down. Then the teeth and gums and sometimes even the jaw can become seriously diseased. \nThese bacteria that come from the food on the teeth and between the teeth are called \"plaque\" or \"bacterial plaque\" and also can cause the gums to become less healthy. \"Gingivitis\" which means gum disease is one type of disease that flossing helps to prevent. Very serious diseases can start on the teeth and move to the bone of the jaw, damaging the jaw badly. Flossing your teeth reduces the danger of these serious diseases of the jaw bone. These hard-to-cure jaw bone diseases are called \"periodontal disease\". \nFood that is trapped between the teeth can be uncomfortable and even cause pain. Some food is hard, for example meat, apple. Ground meat is soft and so is apple sauce. Chicken and turkey meat are hard and full of fibres and very often get trapped between the teeth. When hard food is trapped between the teeth it can cause discomfort and sometimes pain. When hard food is pressed by the teeth against the gum it can cause pain. Some people use toothpicks to try to remove trapped food from between the teeth and other people use dental floss to do this.\nDental floss can do most things that a toothpick can do but dental floss is much thinner than a toothpick and can thus get to places that most toothpicks cannot reach. So floss presumably does a better job at getting bits of food out from between the teeth, relieving discomfort and pain quicker.\nWhen a person first starts flossing, bleeding can happen. This is normal and happens because teeth and gums that are not flossed are less healthy. It will stop as the teeth and gums get healthier with flossing."}
{"id": "3895", "revid": "1055293", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3895", "title": "Rickets", "text": "Rickets is a disease that happens in young children. It happens in children who do not get enough vitamin D and calcium. It causes larger spaces inside bones, and makes them dry, like sponges. It can make the legs curve toward each other (so the knees touch) or away from each other.\nRickets in adults is called osteomalacia.\nThe word \"rickets\" comes from the Greek word \"rhakhis\", which means \"spine.\"\nCause.\nPeople need both vitamin D and calcium to make their bones strong.\nVitamin D helps the bones absorb (take up) calcium. Low vitamin D makes it hard to absorb calcium.\nThe human body makes vitamin D3 in the skin, from cholesterol. Then the liver changes vitamin D3 into calcitriol, which sends calcium from the blood into the bones. The bones need calcium to stay strong. However, the skin will not make vitamin D3 unless enough ultraviolet light shines on it. Sunlight contains ultraviolet light, so getting enough sun is one way of getting enough D3.\nPeople need calcium for calcification. Calcification uses calcium to help make bones bigger and stronger. Low calcium makes bones delicate and easier to break.\nPrevention.\nRickets can be prevented if a person gets plenty of calcium and vitamin D.\nThe best way to do this is to get a lot of sunlight, and eat foods that have a lot of vitamin D and calcium in them. However, people who cannot get enough vitamin D and calcium this way can take supplements (vitamin pills that have calcium and vitamin D in them).\nCalcium.\nFoods that have a lot of calcium in them include:\nCalcium is absorbed best by the bones when it is taken in amounts of 500 600 grams or less. Because of this, doctors suggest eating smaller amounts of foods with calcium in them, at different times in the day, instead of all at once.\nVitamin D.\nThere are three ways to get vitamin D: sunlight, foods, or supplements (vitamin pills that have vitamin D in them). However, many people cannot get enough vitamin D just from their diet.\nThere are only a few foods that have a lot of vitamin D in them. They include:\nBreast milk may not have enough vitamin D in it to prevent rickets. Babies who are only breastfed, and not fed any other foods, may be given vitamin D drops to make sure they do not get rickets. However, this is not a significant risk if mothers and child have some exposure to sunlight. Children with dark skin are more likely to need additional vitamin D.\nRisk factors.\nThese things make a person more likely to get rickets:\nSymptoms.\nSigns and symptoms of rickets include:"}
{"id": "3896", "revid": "16695", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3896", "title": "Bile", "text": "Bile or gall is a green-yellow fluid. It is secreted from the liver of most vertebrate animals, and is often stored in the gall bladder. Bile helps digest fat.\nThe components of bile are\nThe name \"gall\" comes from the Greek word \"chol\u00e8\" meaning green or yellow.\nThe term cholesterol and the illness cholera were named after gall.\nBile is also stored in bile ducts. Often after liver transplants, bile comes out of the body."}
{"id": "3897", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3897", "title": "Dental pulp", "text": "The dental pulp is the part in the center of a tooth. It is made up of living soft tissue and cells. It is surrounded by dentine and contains nerves and blood vessels."}
{"id": "3898", "revid": "1138785", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3898", "title": "Protoplasm", "text": "Protoplasm is an old term, which means the living substance that makes up a cell. It is no longer much used. Biologists prefer to talk about the cytoplasm and the cell nucleus.\nIn plant cells, it is surrounded by a cell wall. In animal cells, the whole cell is made of protoplasm, surrounded by a cell membrane. Protoplasm in living beings is made up of about 7580% water. However, this is rather misleading because the cytoplasm is full of structures called organelles, which do various tasks. The endoplasmic reticulum is the largest of these structures; there are many other organelles. \nThe word \"protoplasm\" was first used in 1846 by Hugo von Mohl to describe the substance in plant cells, apart from the cell wall, the cell nucleus and the vacuole. After the invention of the electron microscope it was clear that a living cell is much more complicated than von Mohl knew."}
{"id": "3899", "revid": "1153456", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3899", "title": "Amylase", "text": "Amylase is an enzyme which breaks down starch into sugars which the body can use.\nMore accurately, it is a family of similar enzymes which work in a wide range of animals, plants and fungi. There are two variants in humans: alpha-amylase, and gamma-amylase.\nAlpha-amylase is a major digestive enzyme. Its optimum pH is 6.7\u20137.0. It is found in saliva and pancreatic juice. It takes starch chains and breaks them into smaller pieces with two or three glucose units. It can break down starch into maltose. It works in the mouth and stomach during digestion.\nThe gamma-amylase has most acidic optimum pH of all amylases because it is most active around pH 3. Therefore, it works best in the stomach, which does have an acidic pH.\nHuman evolution.\nApparently, early humans did not possess salivary amylase. The closest evolutionary relatives of humans, chimpanzees and bonobos, have either one or no copies of the gene for producing salivary amylase. A duplication event of the AMY1 gene led to the production of amylase in the saliva. The same event occurred independently in rodents. This shows the importance of salivary amylase in organisms that eat relatively large amounts of starch.\nCarbohydrates are a food source rich in energy. After the agricultural revolution, human diet began to rely more on plant and animal domestication in place of hunting and gathering. This shift marked the beginning of a diet composed of 49% carbohydrates as opposed to the previous 35% observed in Paleolithic humans. As such, starch became a staple of human diet. Humans that contained amylase in the saliva would benefit from increased ability to digest starch more efficiently and in higher quantities.\nNot all humans have the same number of copies of the AMY1 gene. Populations which rely on carbohydrates have a higher number of AMY1 copies than populations that eat little starch. The number of AMY1 gene copies in humans can range from six copies in agricultural groups such as European-American and Japanese (two high starch populations) to only 2-3 copies in hunter-gatherer societies such as the Biaka, Datog, and Yakuts.\nThe correlation between starch consumption and number of AMY1 copies suggests that more AMY1 copies in high starch populations is caused by natural selection. It is a favorable phenotype for those individuals. Therefore, it is likely that having more copies of AMY1 in a high starch population increases fitness and produces healthier, fitter offspring. Geographically close populations with different eating habits possess a different number of copies of the AMY1 gene. This offers strong evidence that natural selection has acted on this gene."}
{"id": "3900", "revid": "1011873", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3900", "title": "Variegated leaf", "text": "A variegated leaf is a type of leaf.\nUses.\nA variegated leaf is useful in conducting experiments to show that chlorophyll is needed for photosynthesis to happen. They are also popular in horticulture.\nExperiments.\nThe easiest of these experiments is to stain the places where starch is produced (starch is a more compact form of glucose).\nPlace the leaves in boiling water for six minutes to soften the cells, and then in ethanol (alcohol). When the leaves are drained of colour, spread them out on a flat surface. Soak the leaves in iodine and the green parts will turn blue/black and the non green parts will stay the yellowish brown colour of iodine liquid. The green parts contain starch, which makes iodine turn blue/black. The blue/black stain is what shows starch is present. You could take \"before &amp; after\" photos to prove the black areas were green at the start."}
{"id": "3902", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3902", "title": "Seam ripper", "text": "A seam ripper is a cutting tool. It is used for removing stitches in sewing and cutting open buttonholes made on a sewing machine. Sometimes it is also called a thread ripper.\nThe tool usually has a handle, shaft, and head. The head has two points: one flattened to form a pointed blade and the other forming a small point. \nTo use a seam ripper to remove sewn threads, the blade is placed underneath the thread to be cut. The thread slips down between the two points, and the tool is then lifted upwards allowing the blade to cut through the thread. Then the loose thread ends can be removed."}
{"id": "3904", "revid": "22027", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3904", "title": "Plaque", "text": "Plaque: a word meaning a flat, plate-like object."}
{"id": "3905", "revid": "209999", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3905", "title": "Pin cushion", "text": "A pin cushion is small cushion used for holding pins and needles. It is used so that the pins and needles are stored safely and can be taken out by pulling the head."}
{"id": "3906", "revid": "7653597", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3906", "title": "Chemical cell", "text": "A chemical cell converts chemical energy into electrical energy. Most batteries are chemical cells. A chemical reaction takes place inside the battery and causes electric current to flow.\nThere are two main types of batteries - those that are \"rechargeable\" and those that are not.\nA battery that is not rechargeable will give electricity until the chemicals in it are used up. Then it is no longer useful. It can be rightly called 'use and throw'.\nA rechargeable battery can be \"recharged\" by passing electric current backwards through the battery; it can then be used again to produce more electricity. It was Gaston Plante, a French scientist who invented these rechargeable batteries in 1859.\nBatteries come in many shapes and sizes, from very small ones used in toys and cameras, to those used in cars or even larger ones. Submarines require very large batteries.\nElectrochemical cells.\nAn extremely important class of\u00a0oxidation and reduction\u00a0reactions are used to provide useful electrical energy in batteries. A simple electrochemical cell can be made from copper and zinc metals with solutions of their sulphates. In the process of the reaction, electrons can be transferred from the zinc to the copper through an electrically conducting path as a useful electric current.\nAn electrochemical cell can be created by placing metallic electrodes into an electrolyte where a chemical reaction either uses or generates an electric current. Electrochemical cells which generate an electric current are called\u00a0voltaic cells\u00a0or galvanic cells, and common batteries consist of one or more such cells. In other electrochemical cells an externally supplied electric current is used to drive a chemical reaction which would not occur spontaneously. Such cells are called\u00a0electrolytic cells.\nVoltaic cells.\nAn\u00a0electrochemical cell\u00a0which causes external\u00a0electric current\u00a0flow can be created using any two different metals since metals differ in their tendency to lose electrons. Zinc more readily loses electrons than copper, so placing zinc and copper metal in solutions of their salts can cause electrons to flow through an external wire which leads from the zinc to the copper. As a zinc atom provides the electrons, it becomes a positive ion and goes into aqueous solution, decreasing the mass of the zinc electrode. On the copper side, the two electrons received allow it to convert a copper ion from solution into an uncharged copper atom which deposits on the copper electrode, increasing its mass. The two reactions are typically written\nZn(s) --&gt; Zn2+(aq) + 2e-\nCu2+(aq) + 2e-\u00a0--&gt; Cu(s)\nThe letters in parentheses are just reminders that the zinc goes from a solid (s) into a water solution (aq) and vice versa for the copper. It is typical in the language of electrochemistry to refer to these two processes as \"half-reactions\" which occur at the two electrodes.\nIn order for the voltaic cell to continue to produce an external electric current, there must be a movement of the sulfate ions in solution from the right to the left to balance the electron flow in the external circuit. The metal ions themselves must be prevented from moving between the electrodes, so some kind of porous membrane or other mechanism must provide for the selective movement of the negative ions in the electrolyte from the right to the left.\nEnergy is required to force the electrons to move from the zinc to the copper electrode, and the amount of energy per unit charge available from the voltaic cell is called the\u00a0electromotive force (emf)\u00a0of the cell. Energy per unit charge is expressed in\u00a0volts\u00a0(1 volt = 1 joule/coulomb).\nClearly, to get energy from the cell, you must get more energy released from the oxidation of the zinc than it takes to reduce the copper. The cell can yield a finite amount of energy from this process, the process being limited by the amount of material available either in the electrolyte or in the metal electrodes. For example, if there were one\u00a0mole\u00a0of the sulfate ions SO42-\u00a0on the copper side, then the process is limited to transferring two moles of electrons through the external circuit. The amount of\u00a0electric charge\u00a0contained in a mole of electrons is called the Faraday constant, and is equal to\u00a0Avogadro's number\u00a0times the electron charge:Faraday constant = F = NAe = 6.022 x 1023\u00a0x 1.602 x 10-19\u00a0= 96,485 Coulombs/moleThe energy yield from a voltaic cell is given by the cell voltage times the number of moles of electrons transferred times the Faraday constant.\nElectrical energy output = nFEcell\nThe cell emf Ecell\u00a0may be predicted from the\u00a0standard electrode potentials\u00a0for the two metals. For the zinc/copper cell under the standard conditions, the\u00a0calculated cell potential\u00a0is 1.1 volts.\nSimple cell.\nA simple cell typically has plates of copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) in dilute sulphuric acid. The zinc dissolves and bubbles of hydrogen appear on the copper plate. These hydrogen bubbles interfere with the passage of current so a simple cell can only be used for a short time. To provide a steady current, a depolarizer (an oxidizing agent) is needed to oxidize the hydrogen. In the Daniel cell, the depolarizer is copper sulphate, which exchanges the hydrogen for copper. In the Leclanche battery, the depolarizer is manganese dioxide, which oxidizes the hydrogen to water.\nDaniel cell.\nEnglish chemist John Frederick Daniell developed a\u00a0voltaic cell\u00a0in 1836 which used zinc and copper and solutions of their ions."}
{"id": "3907", "revid": "1095188", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3907", "title": "Das Lied der Deutschen", "text": "Das Lied der Deutschen (\"The Song of the German people\"), also known as Deutschlandlied, (\"The Song of Germany\"), is a song written by Joseph Haydn and Hoffmann von Fallersleben. Part of this song is the national anthem of Germany (German National Anthem).\nA line from this song, \"Einigkeit und Recht und Freiheit\" (\"Unity and justice and freedom\") is the considered to be the unofficial motto of Germany.\nHistory.\nThe music was written by Haydn in 1797 as the anthem of Austria. It was called \"Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser\" (\"God protect our Emperor Franz\"). The words which are used today were written by the poet August Heinrich Hoffman von Fallersleben in 1841. \nToday, the first line \"Germany, Germany above all\" sounds too strong for some people, and is often misunderstood. Fallersleben wanted a united Germany when he wrote it. At that time, Germany was not one country, but many small countries. So \"Germany above all\" meant that the most important thing to do was to have a unified Germany. Also, the poet was in Heligoland, where people spoke German but were ruled by the British.\nFallersleben's music was very popular in Germany during the second part of the 19th century. This song was not a national anthem then, but a patriotic song supporting a united German state. In 1918, it replaced the anthem of the German Empire \"Heil Dir im Siegerkranz\" (\"Praise to the war-winner\"), when the Emperor Wilhelm II lost power at the end of the First World War. In 1921, a \"fourth stanza\", a new part or verse, was written by poet Albert Matthai with words about the difficult life in Germany at that time. This verse was rarely used.\nDuring the time of Hitler, only the first part of the song was used. This was often followed by a Nazi party song. This offended the international audience as the first stanza supports Germany holding colonial powers in non-consenting nations.\nAfter the Second World War, Germany was divided into two countries. In 1949, the new Western Germany tried to get a new song for the national anthem. Another song was chosen, written by poet Rudolf Alexander Schr\u00f6der. It was not very popular. Finally, the third part of the Fallersleben song was made into the national anthem.\nIn the other part of Germany, the Eastern Germany, the words of poet Johannes R. Becher (\"Auferstanden aus Ruinen\" - \"Re-built from the Ruins\") were used with a song written by Hanns Eisler. It was not very popular, and from the 1970s the words were not sung, because of the line \"Germany, [our] unified fatherland\".\nAfter East and West Germany united again in 1990, the Fallersleben song again became the national anthem of Germany but only the third part is used. Today, the first part of the song is popular with nationalist extremists."}
{"id": "3913", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3913", "title": "Cavity", "text": "A cavity is a hole.\nIt can also mean:"}
{"id": "3914", "revid": "1119110", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3914", "title": "Evidence", "text": "Evidence is something that is used to support an argument. It gives examples of why something is true. \nFor example, if someone come across a cup of spilled milk, that person could look for evidence as to how the milk was spilled. If hairs of a cat and paw prints were found on the ground, they could be evidence that a cat was the cause of the spilled milk. If a witness saw the cat spilling the milk, her testimony would also be evidence."}
{"id": "3917", "revid": "293183", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3917", "title": "Dyadic", "text": "A dyadic is a math function that needs two things in order to give something out. Addition and multiplication are dyadic. Powers are also dyadic. There are many more functions that are dyadic.\nDyadic may specifically refer to:"}
{"id": "3919", "revid": "7708136", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3919", "title": "Hill", "text": "A hill is a landform that is higher than the surrounding terrain and that is smaller than a mountain. Hill is a highland of much lower elevation than a mountain. Normally it is not as steep as a mountain. By definition, a hill is often described as being lower than 600 meters (about 2,000 feet). However, some definitions say a hill is lower than 300 meters (about 1,000 feet). The surface of a hill is much more stable than that of a dune. Hill have long been used for hill forts"}
{"id": "3922", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3922", "title": "Enzyme", "text": "An enzyme is a protein molecule in cells which works as a biological catalyst. Enzymes speed up chemical reactions in the body, but do not get used up in the process, therefore can be used over and over again.\nAlmost all biochemical reactions in living things need enzymes. With an enzyme, chemical reactions go much faster than they would without the enzyme.p39 Other biocatalysts are catalytic RNA molecules, called ribozymes.\nThe substances at the start of a reaction are called substrates. The substances at the end of a reaction are the products. Enzymes work on the substrates, and turn them into products. The study of enzymes is called enzymology.\nThe first enzyme was found in 1833 by Anselme Payen.\nEnzyme structure.\nThere are thousands of different enzymes and each one is specific to the reaction which it catalyses. Enzymes have names which show what they do. Enzyme names usually end in \u2013ase to show that they are enzymes. Examples of this include ATP synthase. It makes a chemical called ATP. Another example is DNA polymerase. It reads an intact DNA strand and uses it as a template to make a new strand.\nOne example of an enzyme is amylase, found in saliva. It breaks down starch molecules into smaller glucose and maltose molecules. Another kind of enzyme is lipase. It breaks down fats into smaller molecules, fatty acids and glycerol.d\nThe proteases are a whole class of enzymes. They break down other enzymes and proteins back into amino acids. Nucleases are enzymes that cut DNA or RNA, often in specific place in the molecule.\nEnzymes are not only for breaking large chemicals into smaller chemicals. Other enzymes take smaller chemicals and build them up into bigger chemicals, and do many other chemical tasks. The classification below lists the main types.\nBiochemists often draw a picture of an enzyme to use as a visual aid or map of the enzyme. This is hard to do because there may be hundreds or thousands of atoms in an enzyme. Biochemists can not draw all this detail. Instead, they use ribbon models as pictures of enzymes. Ribbon models can show the shape of an enzyme without having to draw every atom.\nMost enzymes will not work unless the temperature and pH are just right. In mammals the right temperature is usually about 37oC degrees (body temperature). The correct pH can vary greatly. Pepsin is an example of an enzyme that works best when pH is about 1.5.\nHeating an enzyme above a certain temperature will destroy the enzyme permanently. It will be broken down by protease and the chemicals will be used again.\nSome chemicals can help an enzyme do its job even better. These are called \"activators\". Sometimes, a chemical can slow down an enzyme or even make the enzyme not work at all. These are called \"inhibitors\". Most drugs are chemicals that either speed up or slow down some enzyme in the human body.\nLock and key model.\nEnzymes are very specific. In 1894 Emil Fischer suggested that both the enzyme and the substrate have \"specific complementary geometric shapes\" that fit exactly into one another. This is often referred to as \"the lock and key\" model. However, this model fails to explain what happens next.\nIn 1958, Daniel Koshland suggested a modification to the lock and key model. Since enzymes are rather flexible structures, the active site is reshaped by interactions with the substrate. As a result, the substrate does not simply bind to a rigid active site. The amino acid side-chains of the active site are bent into positions so the enzyme does its catalytic work. In some cases, such as glycosidases, the substrate molecule also changes shape slightly as it enters the active site.\nFunction.\nThe general equation for an enzyme reaction is:\nEnzymes lower the activation energy of a reaction by forming an intermediary complex with the substrate. This complex is called an enzyme-substrate complex.\nFor example, sucrase, 400 times the size of its substrate sucrose, splits the sucrose into its constituent sugars, which are glucose and fructose. The sucrase bends the sucrose, and strains the bond between the glucose and fructose. Water molecules join in and make the cleavage in a fraction of a second. Enzymes have these key features:\nControl of enzyme activity.\nThere are five main ways that enzyme activity is controlled in the cell.\nEnzyme inhibitors.\nInhibitors can be used to stop an enzyme from binding to a substrate. This may be done to slow down an enzyme-controlled reaction. The inhibitors fit loosely or partially into the enzyme's active site. This prevents or slows down an enzyme-substrate complex being formed.\nDenaturation.\nDenaturation is the \"irreversible\" alteration of an enzyme's active site, caused by an extreme change in temperature or pH. It will decrease the rate of reaction because the substrate molecule will not be able to fit into the active site, so products cannot be formed.\nCofactors.\nCofactors, or coenzymes, are helper molecules which are needed to make an enzyme work. They are not proteins, and may be organic or inorganic molecules. Both types of molecules sometimes contain a metal ion at the centre, such as Mg2+, Cu2+, Mn2+ or iron-sulphur clusters. This is because such ions may act as electron donors, and this is important in many reactions. The need of enzymes for various little helpers is the basic reason why animals, including ourselves, need trace elements and vitamins.\nClassification.\nEnzymes have been classified by the \"International Union of Biochemistry\". Their Commission on Enzymes has grouped all known enzymes into six classes:\nThe individual enzymes are given a four-figure number which classifies them in the database.p145\nUses of enzymes.\nEnzymes are used commercially for:"}
{"id": "3924", "revid": "7853644", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3924", "title": "Mountain", "text": "A mountain is a large natural rise of the Earth's surface that usually has a \"summit\" (the name for a mountain's top, which can also be called a peak). It is usually steeper and taller than a hill. By definition, mountains are often thought of as being a hill which is higher than 600 meters (about 2,000 feet). However, some definitions say a mountain is a hill higher than 300 meters (about 1,000 feet).\nFormation.\nThe forming of a mountain is called orogeny. Mountains are formed when rock layers in the ground are pushed from opposite sides, and by being pushed, they push the crust up. A mountain range is a large group of mountains beside each other. There are three main ways a mountain may be made:\nFold mountains.\nFold mountains occur when two plates collide. The less dense continental crust \"floats\" on the denser mantle rocks beneath. The continental crust is normally much thicker under mountains, compared to lower lying areas. Rock can fold either symmetrically or asymmetrically. The upfolds are anticlines and the downfolds are synclines. The Jura Mountains are an example of fold mountains.\nFolded mountains make up some of the highest mountains in the world. Folded mountains commonly form along boundaries, where 2 continents meet. Some really complex folds are in parts of the Andes, Alps, Himalayas, Appalachians, and Russia's Ural Mountains. These long mountain chains also show lots of signs of folding.\nFault-block mountains.\nBlock mountains are caused by faults in the crust: a seam where rocks can move past each other. When rocks on one side of a fault rise relative to the other, it can form a mountain. The uplifted blocks are block mountains or \"horsts\". The dropped blocks are called \"graben\". They can form extensive rift valley systems. This form of landscape can be seen in East Africa, the Vosges, the Basin and Range province of Western North America and the Rhine valley. These areas often occur when the regional stress is extensional and the crust is thinned.\nVolcanic mountains.\nVolcanoes are formed in one of these ways:\nExamples of volcanoes include Mount Fuji in Japan and Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines. The magma does not have to reach the surface in order to create a mountain: magma that solidifies below ground can still form dome mountains, such as Navajo Mountain in the states of Utah and Arizona, in the United States.\nVolcanic mountains form when molten rock erupts onto the Earth's surface. They can either form on land or in the ocean. The Cascade Range in Washington, Oregon and northern California is made of volcanoes. Some of the largest volcanoes are on divergent boundaries, which form the mid-ocean ridges. The mid-ocean ridges have big volcanic mountain chains that run through the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans. The mountains in the mid-ocean ridges can grow tall enough to create islands such as Iceland or the Azores.\nOther volcanic mountains form over hot spots, pockets of magma beneath the crust which erupt onto Earth's surface. The Hawaiian Islands are the tops of really high volcanic islands that have formed over a hot spot on the sea floor. The main Hawaiian island is a volcano about above the ocean floor. Its base is about wide. Almost of this island is above sea level.\nOther terms.\nDome mountains.\nDome mountains, like those in the Black Hills of South Dakota and the Adirondack Mountains of New York, are an unusual domish type of mountain that is formed when molten rock rises through the crust and push up the rock layers above it. This creates a circular dome on the Earth's surface. The molten rock later cools off and forms hardened rock. When the pushed up rocks are worn away, the hardened rock is shown. This hardened rock then wears away in places. When it wears away, it leaves mountains, and they are called dome mountains.\nPlateau mountains.\nPlateau mountains are formed a bit like folded mountains. They are large areas of flat topped rocks that have been lifted high above the crust by continental plates. Most plateaus are near folded mountains.\nHeight.\nThe height of a mountain is measured as distance above sea level.\nTallest mountains.\nThe highest known mountain in the Solar System is the Olympus Mons (27 km high) on Mars. The highest mountain on earth is Mount Everest (8,848m) which is in Nepal and Tibet, in Asia.\nThe \"tallest\" mountain in the world is Mauna Loa, in Hawaii. The \"height\" of a mountain is measured from sea level, but the \"tallness\" of a mountain is measured from its base, even if under water. The highest mountain in North America is Mount McKinley (6,194m) in Alaska in the USA. The highest in South America is Aconcagua (6,962m) in Argentina. For Africa, it is Kilimanjaro (5,963m) of Tanzania. In Europe, the highest mountain is in Russia called Elbrus (5,633m). Antarctica's highest mountain is Vinsin Massiff (5,140m). In Oceania, a mountain called Puncak Jaya (5,030m) is the highest there. This particular mountain is in Papua New Guinea / Indonesia."}
{"id": "3925", "revid": "1149075", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3925", "title": "Machine code", "text": "Machine code is a computer program written in machine language. It uses the instruction set of a particular computer architecture. It is usually written in binary. Machine code is the lowest level of software. Other programming languages are translated into machine code so the computer can execute them.\nAn instruction tells the process what operation to perform. Each instruction is made up of an opcode (operation code) and operand(s). The operands are usually memory addresses or data. An instruction set is a list of the opcodes available for a computer. Machine code is what assembly code and other programming languages are compiled to or interpreted as.\nProgram builders turn code into another language or machine code.\nMachine code is sometimes called native code. This is used when talking about things that work on only some computers.\nWriting machine code.\nMachine code can be written in different forms:\nTypical instructions of machine code.\nThere are many kinds of instructions usually found in an instruction set:\nMany modern processors use microcode for some of the commands. More complex commands tend to use it. This is often done with CISC architectures.\nInstructions.\nEvery processor or processor family has its own instruction set. Instructions are patterns of bits that correspond to different commands that can be given to the machine. Thus, the instruction set is specific to a class of processors using (mostly) the same architecture.\nNewer processor designs often include all the instructions of a predecessor and may add additional instructions. Sometimes, a newer design will discontinue or alter the meaning of an instruction code (typically because it is needed for new purposes), affecting code compatibility; even nearly completely compatible processors may show slightly different behavior for some instructions, but this is rarely a problem.\nSystems may also differ in other details, such as memory arrangement, operating systems, or peripheral devices. Because a program normally relies on such factors, different systems will typically not run the same machine code, even when the same type of processor is used.\nMost instructions have one or more opcode fields. They specify the basic instruction type. Other fields may give the type of the operands, the addressing mode, and so on. There may also be special instructions that are contained in the opcode itself. These instructions are called \"immediates\".\nProcessor designs can be different in other ways. Different instructions can have different lengths. Also, they can have the same length. Having all instructions have the same length can simplify the design.\nExample.\nThe MIPS architecture has instructions which are 32 bits long. This section has examples of code. The general type of instruction is in the \"op\" (operation) field. It is the highest 6 bits. J-type (jump) and I-type (immediate) instructions are fully given by \"op\". R-type (register) instructions include the field \"funct\". It determines the exact operation of the code. The fields used in these types are:\n 6 5 5 5 5 6 bits\n [ op | rs | rt | rd |shamt| funct] R-type\n [ op | rs | rt | address/immediate] I-type\n [ op | target address ] J-type\n\"rs\", \"rt\", and \"rd\" indicate register operands. \"shamt\" gives a shift amount. The \"address\" or \"immediate\" fields contain an operand directly.\nExample: add the registers 1 and 2. Place the result in register 6. It is encoded:\n [ op | rs | rt | rd |shamt| funct]\n 0 1 2 6 0 32 decimal\n 000000 00001 00010 00110 00000 100000 binary\nLoad a value into register 8. Take it from the memory cell 68 cells after the location listed in register 3:\n [ op | rs | rt | address/immediate]\n 35 3 8 68 decimal\n 100011 00011 01000 00000 00001 000100 binary\nJump to the address 1024:\n [ op | target address ]\n 2 1024 decimal\n 000010 00000 00000 00000 10000 000000 binary"}
{"id": "3926", "revid": "586", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3926", "title": "Area", "text": "Area is the amount of space a two dimensional (flat) surface takes up. It is useful because it is how much of a material is needed to make a hollow container. Area is the amount of surface covered by a close object or shape. \nSome units used to measure area are square foot, square mile, square metre and square kilometre. The area of a planar figure is often written as formula_1. Areas of regular shapes such as square, rectangle, triangle and circle can be calculated through formulas. The area of an irregular shape can be approximated through grid or graph paper.\nOne can use different formulas to find the area of different shapes. For example:\nThe area of a flat object is related to the surface area and volume of a three-dimensional object.\nThe area under a curve can be found using integration, a concept from calculus."}
{"id": "3927", "revid": "70336", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3927", "title": "Air space", "text": "Air space is the area of the air that is controlled by a country or organisation. You have to have the permission of the controller to enter their air space in an airplane. The air traffic controllers make sure the planes go in the right place and do not hit each other or something else. Some countries are very protective of their air space."}
{"id": "3928", "revid": "203", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3928", "title": "Web page", "text": ""}
{"id": "3929", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3929", "title": "Swamp cooler", "text": "Swamp coolers are simple type of air conditioning device that can cool a room of a house or a car by using the cooling effect of the evaporation of water. Swamp coolers can cool the air temperature in a small space by drawing the air through wet pads (some are made of aspen wood) using an electric fan.\nSwamp coolers work best in dry climates such as the American Southwest and the American South. They are usually much cheaper to buy and operate than refrigerated air-conditioning devices.\nThis type of air conditioner was first used thousands of years ago in ancient Iran"}
{"id": "3930", "revid": "532461", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3930", "title": "Saskatoon", "text": "Saskatoon is a city in Saskatchewan, Canada. Saskatoon is the biggest city in Saskatchewan. Saskatoon, though, is not the capital of Saskatchewan. Regina is the capital of Saskatchewan. The South Saskatchewan River flows through the centre of the city and many people enjoy boating, biking and walking in this area. The University of Saskatchewan is also in Saskatoon.\nThe name\u00a0\"Saskatoon\"\u00a0[in\u00a0Cree:\u00a0\"s\u00e2skwat\u00f4n\", \"Saskatoon\"] comes from the Cree inanimate noun\u00a0\"mis\u00e2skwat\u00f4mina\"\u00a0\"saskatoon berries\", which refers to the sweet, violet-coloured\u00a0berry\u00a0that grows in the area."}
{"id": "3932", "revid": "211304", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3932", "title": "Glass rod", "text": "Glass rods are sometimes used as stirrers in laboratory environments.\nGlass rods are often used to spread liquids evenly onto something. An example would be to coat glass surfaces with liquids to look at them under a microscope.\nGlass rods rubbed with silk or fur were used in early demonstrations of electrical energy. \nGlass rods are commonly manufactured in diameters of 3 mm, 6 mm, and 10 mm.\nGlass is used for these rods because it does not react with most laboratory chemicals."}
{"id": "3933", "revid": "1113899", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3933", "title": "Thermometer", "text": "A thermometer is an instrument for measuring or showing temperature (how hot or cold something is). One type of thermometer is a narrow, concealed glass tube containing mercury or alcohol which extends along the tube as it expands. Another type is a digital thermometer, which uses electronics to measure temperature.\nEarly thermometers from the time of Galileo measured the expansion and contraction of air. After the middle 17th century many used alcohol or mercury. In the 19th century a mechanical thermometer was in invented that used a bimetallic strip to move a pointer. This kind is still popular where people like to read temperature from a distance.\nLaboratory thermometers.\nA laboratory thermometer is a tool used in laboratories, places where scientists and science techs perform experiments and measure things. A laboratory thermometer can measure temperature very closely. A laboratory thermometer can be put into the liquid or other thing that the scientist wants to measure. A laboratory thermometer has a long stem with a silver bulb at the end. The silver color in the bulb usually means there is mercury in it. Mercury becomes bigger as the temperature becomes hotter. But mercury is a poison to humans. Mercury-in-glass thermometers are less used in the 21st century because people want digital, alcohol-filled, and organic-based thermometers instead.\nMedical thermometers.\nIn the 20th century, the traditional clinical thermometer was a mercury-in-glass thermometer. People put the end of this in their mouth (\"oral\" temperature), under their arm, or in their rectum (\"rectal\" temperature).\nIt is only possible to find oral temperatures on patients who can hold the thermometer correctly in their mouth. So small children cannot use this method. It is also a problem for people with a cough or people who are vomiting. In the past it was a big problem because mercury thermometers needed a long time to measure the temperature. Today's digital thermometers are faster. If a person drinks something hot or cold, one still needs to wait before testing their oral temperature. \nWhen measuring a person's rectal temperature, it helps to use a cream on the thermometer. Rectal thermometers are usually more reliable since they aren't as much influenced by other factors. In some countries people think it is embarrassing to use them for people older than two or three. In other countries, it is considered normal for children and adults to use rectal thermometers.\nIn the 1990s, people in many countries thought mercury thermometers were too risky, as mercury is dangerous if it leaks out. Today we use electronic thermometers. Sometimes thermometers with liquids are used, but not with mercury. \nThere are other kinds of medical thermometers: \"tympanic\" thermometers test the temperature of the tympanic membrane (the eardrum) with infrared; \"band\" thermometers test a person's temperature on the front of their head."}
{"id": "3935", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3935", "title": "Week", "text": "A week is 7 days in connecting order. There are usually 52 weeks in a year.\nIn the English language, the days of the week are named after gods in Norse mythology, except for Saturday, which is named after a Roman god.\nDepending on the law of a country, the week either starts on Monday and ends on Sunday, or starts on Sunday and ends on Saturday. In most countries, Saturday and Sunday are the weekend. Friday, Saturday, and Sunday is a religious day for Muslims, Jews, and Christians, respectively."}
{"id": "3936", "revid": "1064256", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3936", "title": "Suffix", "text": "A suffix is a few letters put at the end of a word to change its meaning. It is a type of affix mostly used to show Inflection\nVerb examples:\nAdjective examples:\nCompare to prefix. Prefixes are letters put at the beginning of a word to change its meaning."}
{"id": "3937", "revid": "7874804", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3937", "title": "Japanese language", "text": "The Japanese language () is the official language of Japan, in East Asia. Japanese belongs to the Japonic language family, which also includes the endangered Ryukyuan languages. One theory says Japanese and Korean are related, but most linguists no longer think so. Other theories about the origin of Japanese are that it is related to the Austronesian languages, the Dravidian languages, or the controversial Altaic language family. The term used for Japanese as a course of study by citizens is \"kokugo\" (\u56fd\u8a9e), which means national language. Nonetheless, Japanese is still referred to as Nihon-go by the Japanese.\nJapanese uses three separate writing systems: hiragana, katakana, and kanji. Hiragana and katakana are phonetic systems and show the pronunciation of Japanese words. Kanji is the Japanese variation of Chinese characters and shows the meaning of Japanese words. The three systems are used interchangeably, and all three systems can often be found in the same sentence. The three systems are each reserved for different purposes.\nIn English, the order of the words is very important. For example, the sentences \"Is it?\" and \"It is.\" mean different things. In Japanese, differences are often made by adding or changing the ending of words (using the previous example, one would say them as \u305d\u3046\u3067\u3059\u304b \"sou desu ka\" and \u305d\u3046\u3067\u3059 \"sou desu\", respectively). A Japanese word has a stem called a \"body\", and additional parts (called suffixes). Changing the suffix can change the meaning or the grammar of the word.\nAfter World War II, many English words entered the Japanese language. An example of one would be \u201c\u30a2\u30a4\u30b9\u30af\u30ea\u30fc\u30e0, aisukur\u012bmu\u201d, meaning \u201cice cream\u201d.\nSounds.\nJapanese has five vowel sounds that can have two different lengths. They are \"a, i, u, e, o\". In IPA they are transliterated as /a/, /i/, /\u026f/, /e/, /o/; and they are pronounced in English as \"ah, ee, oo, eh, oh\". Lengthening a vowel can change the meaning of the word: \"ojisan\" (\u304a\u3058\u3055\u3093, uncle) and \"ojiisan\" (\u304a\u3058\u3044\u3055\u3093, grandfather). Japanese has a sound that is like the English \"l\", but it is also like the English \"r\". (That is why it can be difficult for many Japanese when to learn to make both sounds when they speak English.) Japanese has a sound that is not uncommon in English and is usually written \"Tsu\" (\u3064). This sound appears in \"tsunami\" (\u3064\u306a\u307f), the Japanese word for large ocean waves caused by earthquakes or extreme weather.\nGrammar.\nWhen foreigners speak Japanese, it is important they know how formal they must be when they speak to people you may or may not know. In Japan, it could be considered quite impolite (rude) if you are not formal enough.\nIn Japanese, sentences use subject-object-verb (SOV) word order, so the verb is at the end of the sentence and the subject is at the beginning. Many sentences have no subject, and the listener can infer the subject based context and the form of a verb.\nIn Japanese, Japan is called \"Nihon\" (\u65e5\u672c), and the language is called \"Nihongo\" (\u65e5\u672c\u8a9e) (-go means \"language\"). Sometimes, the words \"Nippon\" and \"Nippongo\" are also used, but both words are now thought of as more nationalist, and \"Nihon\" is a more neutral word. The kanji of the word mean \"sun-origin.\" Since Japan is at the eastern edge of Asia, to observers in China, the sun rose from the direction of Japan. That is why Japan is called \"The Land of Rising Sun.\"\nJapanese is also agglutinative language, especially in its verbs. Its words has a short \"body,\" and prefixes or suffixes are easily added to change or to redefine the meaning.\nJapanese words come from three main sources. The first is \"wago\" (\u548c\u8a9e), which are native Japanese words and can also be called \"yamato kotoba\" (\u5927\u548c\u8a00\u8449). The second is \"kango\" (\u6f22\u8a9e), which are Chinese loanwords. The third is \"gairaigo\" (\u5916\u6765\u8a9e), which are loanwords borrowed from languages other than Chinese (usually English since the Second World War).\nWriting System.\nJapanese has three main writing systems:\nHiragana is a Syllabary, meaning each character represents a syllable or vowel. Hiragana is the standard, phonetic writing system in Japanese and is used for grammatical words or particles e.g. \u306f\u3001\u3092 (wa - Subject particle, o - Object Particle); words that don't have Kanji characters e.g. \u3053\u3093\u306b\u3061\u306f (kon'nichiwa - hello); or for beginners to write Kanji. The symbols were originally adopted from Kanji characters and have changed overtime into their distinct, rounded shapes (e.g. \u4ee5 \u2192\u3044).\nKatakana is also a Syllabary, with each Hiragana character having a character in Katakana (e.g. \u3042 = \u30a2 \u3053 = \u30b3). Katakana is used for impact (similar to italics in English) as well as gairaigo words and direct transliterations from English e.g. \u30e1\u30cb\u30e5\u30fc (Menyuu - Menu). Katakana was originally made by Buddhist Monks to teach Japanese people how to read Chinese.\nKanji is an adaptation of the Chinese logographic writing system, meaning each symbol was originally meant to look like the word it was describing. Each symbol can represent a word e.g. \u97f3 (oto - sound) or a syllable in a larger word. There are multiple pronunciations for each Kanji character, categorised into On'yomi (\u97f3\u8aad\u307f) or Kun'yomi (\u8a13\u8aad\u307f), depending on the word's origin."}
{"id": "3939", "revid": "7691169", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3939", "title": "Spice", "text": "Spice is an ingredient that adds flavor to food. It is usually used to enrich or alter the quality of something. Spices can be used to give food an interesting and exciting taste.\nExamples of a spice would be cinnamon, fenugreek and nutmeg.\nSpices can also be used to hide or cover up bad tastes in the food, because it is rotten or affected by fungi, e.g. marzipan.\nIndians and Pakistanis use a lot of spices like turmeric"}
{"id": "3940", "revid": "68157", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3940", "title": "Flavor", "text": "Flavour or flavor (US English) is the main quality of anything which affects the taste. When someone remarks on the \"flavor\" of something they are trying to describe the specific way something tastes.\nFlavor can also be used to describe the act of adding a taste alteration (to change the taste) to something. This is usually done by adding spices or sugars, though in \"processed food\" there are oftentimes artificial (fake) flavors."}
{"id": "3941", "revid": "1134777", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3941", "title": "Muslim", "text": ""}
{"id": "3942", "revid": "212981", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3942", "title": "Bank", "text": "A bank is a financial institution where customers can save or borrow money. Banks also invest money to build up their reserve of money. What they do is regulated by laws. Those laws differ in different countries. The people who work at a bank are called bank employees. Certain banks deal directly with the public and they are the only ones which an ordinary person will deal with. Other banks deal with investments and international currency trading.\nCustomer's money may be placed in the bank for safe keeping. Banks may give loans to customers under an agreement to pay the money back to the bank at a later time, with interest. An example is getting a mortgage to buy a house or apartment. Banks also can use the money they have from deposit accounts to invest in businesses in order to make more money.\nIn most countries the rules for banks are made by the government acting through laws. A central bank (such as the Bank of England) adjusts how much money is issued at a particular time. This is a factor in the economy of a country, and the government takes the big decisions. These \"banks of issue\" take in, and issue out, coins and banknotes.\nHistory.\nThe word \"bank\" comes from an Italian word \"banco\", meaning \"a bench\", since Italian merchants in the Renaissance made deals to borrow and lend money beside a bench. They placed the money on that bench.\nElementary financial records are known from the beginning of history. Baked clay records were done before the invention of writing.\nIn the 17th century, merchants started storing their gold with goldsmiths in London. The goldsmiths had their own vaults, and charged a fee for storing the merchants' gold. The goldsmiths eventually started loaning money using the gold left to them, and also paid interest on the gold.\nThe Bank of England began issuing banknotes in 1695. The oldest bank still in existence is Monte dei Paschi di Siena in Siena, Italy, which started in 1472.\nBanking activities.\nA bank usually provides the following services:"}
{"id": "3943", "revid": "966595", "url": "https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3943", "title": "Halley's Comet", "text": "Halley's Comet (Comet Halley) is a comet which comes round every 75 or 76 years. When it is near, it can be seen with the naked eye. It will return in 2061.\nThe comet is named after Edmond Halley (1656\u20131742), an English astronomer, who predicted the comet's return. Halley's Comet was the first comet to be recognized as periodic. (Periodic means that it comes by Earth regularly.)\nWhen the comet came close to the Earth in 1986, it was visited by several space-probes. The probe \"Giotto\" from the European Space Agency managed the closest approach to the comet.\nThe number of years that the comet finishes its full cycle can vary depending on the effect of another planet's gravitational pull.\nIn 1986, Halley's Comet was the first to be observed in detail by spacecraft. It gave the first data on the structure of a comet nucleus and how the \"coma\" (nebulous envelope around the core or nucleus) and the tail formed. These observations supported Fred Whipple's \"dirty snowball\" model. This correctly predicted that Halley would be composed of a mixture of volatile ices \u2013 such as water, carbon dioxide, ammonia, \u2013 and dust. The missions also adjusted these ideas. For example, it is now known that the \"surface\" of Halley is mostly dusty, non-volatile materials, and that only a small portion of it is icy."}
